

Attentionality and Originary
Ethics: Upclining
Adam Katz
Department of English
Quinnipiac University
Hamden, CT 06518
Adam.Katz@quinnipiac.edu
However paradoxical it may seem, I venture to suggest that
our age threatens one day to appear in the history of human
culture as marked by the most dramatic and difficult trial of
all, the discovery of and training in the meaning of the
‘simplest’ acts of existence: seeing, listening, speaking,
reading...
Louis Althusser, Reading Capital, 15
An act of pure attention, if you are capable of it, will bring its
own answer. And you choose that object to concentrate
upon, which will best focus your consciousness. Every real
discovery made, ever serious and significant decision ever
reached, was reached and made by divination. The soul stirs,
and makes an act of pure attention, and that is a discovery.
D.H. Lawrence, “Etruscan Places,” 55.
In a recent Chronicle of Love and Resentment, Eric Gans

frames the ethical function of language as follows:
In all the years in which I have attempted to explain GA in
writing and in speech, I have tended to place the major
emphasis on representation, and in particular on “formal
representation” or language. One of the points I have
insisted on is that human language is qualitatively different
from animal “languages”; the researches and insights of
such as Terrence Deacon have essentially ended the debate
on this point. But it follows from my very “definition” of the
human as the species that poses a greater problem to its
own survival than the totality of forces outside the human
community that the primary transformation of the proto-
human into the human was ethical. Language and more
broadly, representation emerged, per the originary
hypothesis, to defer conflict, not to provide a cognitive or
ratiocinative tool. But in the configuration of the originary
event, the moral model of the reciprocal exchange of the
sign is just as indubitably unique a human creation as
language, and indeed more essential to the success of the
event—and to the consequent emergence of our species.
The urgent need that the event fulfills is to find a model of
behavior that can defer violence within a community for
which one-on-one animal hierarchy no longer provides an
adequate solution. Eric Gans Chronicle 431, “Originary
Ethics.”

The question of appropriate emphasis aside, the distinction
Gans posits here, between the sign as a formal
representation of a transcendent object, on the one hand,
and the sign as a result, means or manifestation of
reciprocity seems to me one that the originary hypothesis
itself transcends. In other words, “formal representation” is
itself ethical, is indeed the origin and resource of any ethics,
so that ethics cannot be thought outside of it. At the same
time, formal representation cannot be thought outside of
ethics, since the “formality” of the representation lies in the
shared attention it effects, and in this shared attention lies
any ethics. In shared, or joint attention, is the fundamental
equality-on-the-scene that constitutes the human. All the
resources we need for thinking about ethics lie in joint
attention, in our ability to point to something, and
approaching ethics in this way might enable us to create
more minimal, more pared down, ethical vocabularies.
To   s t a r t   w i t h ,   i f   w e   c a n   fo l d   m o r a l   r e c i p r o c i t y   i n t o   t h e   s h a r e d
attention constitutive of the sign and scene, couldn’t we say
that what is immoral and a denial of reciprocity is whatever
interrupts that shared attention? There are two ways shared
attention can be interrupted: first, through some kind of
distraction; second, through some kind of fixation.
Distraction (distracting others; allowing oneself to be
distracted) tears us away from the scene of joint attention,
opens the possibility of unchecked approach to the object,

and thereby demands a renewed, necessarily risky effort to
redirect attention to the object—that is, distraction causes
regression to a higher threshold of significance; fixation
involves tearing oneself away from the scene and, ultimately,
turning the other participants into objects of rather than
participants in, one’s now singular attention. Joint attention
involves some equipoise amongst the participants of the
scene: each knows that the other(s) could advance towards
the object while accepting the signs given and given off by
the other as warranty that they won’t without sufficient
advance warning. Distraction, we could say, is the
introduction of noise into the information thereby exchanged
—either not putting forward sufficiently unequivocal signs
oneself or subtracting from the univocality of those put
forward by other(s). Fixation, meanwhile, is the securing for
oneself a system of processing information that reduces all
information to univocality, on terms not subject to reciprocal
exchange. Both distraction and fixation abort the scene, but
both are also complementary possibilities of the originary
structure of joint attention: the actuality or fear of distraction
favors the formation of fixations, and so the ethical problem
consists less in preventing than in recuperating and
interrupting distractions and fixations. If we consider that
anyone enters a scene by following a line of attention—by
looking at what someone else is looking at and deferring
appropriation as the other does in order to continue looking
—one has not fully joined the scene until that line of attention

has passed through oneself, and has been seen to do so. In
other words, attention is not joint until all the participants
show, through signs, that they are letting the object be so as
to see what it has to show, to hear what it has to say—in
which case, each participant must be inspected, so to
speak, or credentialized, by having the sign they put forth
validated. For one’s joining of the line of attention to become
evident and thereby accepted as legitimate, that attention
must first land on oneself as its object—in other words, each
new participant on the scene represents a potential
interruption of shared attention At this crucial point upon
which one’s entry into the scene depends, one can only
avoid becoming a distraction and potential source of fixation
in others by doubling that attention back on oneself by
joining it, becoming a sign and hence invisible, insofar as
others are redirected back to the object through you. In that
case, you will have shown others that the line of attention
passes through your own eyes; unless, of course, your self-
referentiality simply intensifies your distractiveness. Whether
a distraction has taken place will depend upon whether
those attended to or, in Louis Althusser’s term,
“interpellated,” as potential objects of resentment or desire
will have restored the line of attention by incorporating the
interruption into the scene’s founding sign. Perhaps an
analogy would be helpful here. The neuroscientist Daniela
Schiller has discovered that that

memories are not unchanging physical traces in the brain.
Instead, they are malleable constructs that may be rebuilt
every time they are recalled. The research suggests, she
said, that doctors (and psychotherapists) might be able to
use this knowledge to help patients block the fearful
emotions they experience when recalling a traumatic event,
converting chronic sources of debilitating anxiety into benign
trips down memory lane.
If the originary event is event and sign together, then there is
no event without the sign being both emitted and iterated by
all the participants on the scene—just as memories are not
completed until they are recalled, or represented (and are
therefore never complete), the event will only have taken
place once it is represented in the sign. There is thus a lag
during which the event both has and has not taken place,
and the sign, much like the therapeutic experience Schiller
hopes to employ, uses that lag to convert chronic sources of
violence into benign signification. Since in this lag “before”
and “after” have not yet been completely settled, the benign
sign can be secured both before and after the traumatic
event has taken place. And what makes the sign “benign” is
not that it excludes content (as Schiller remarks, the
traumatic memories are recalled) but that violence marking
the event remembered is not what makes it memorable.
Instead, the sign can embed the violence in some other
elements of the memory that mitigate its fearfulness by

turning the event into a sign—a sign, I would suggest, that
prevents the one violent event from becoming the first in a
series of such events compulsively suffered and/or
committed.
I would call this restoration of the line of attention the “loop”
in the line of attention, and undergoing this looping is what I
would call “ostentation,” which is where ethical being is
located. Whether one can undergo or go through the loop
depends upon the group’s ability to see you as restoring the
line of attention as well as your ability to do so—ethics
involves both ostentation and conferring a completed
ostentation upon others, or the conversion of attentionality
into intentionality. And this means that whether one has
distracted or patched together the continuity of the line of
attention, or whether one has proactively identified a break
or fixated upon (and thereby aggravated) the source of the
break in that line can only be known in the aftermath on a
new, converted scene of joint attention.
We keep the line of attention going by language learning—
every loop in the line of attention involves an encounter of
idioms. While it would be absurd to say that each of us
speaks our own language, I think it makes perfect sense to
say that at the margins we all differ in the emergent idioms
we speak and that it is at such margins that real ethical
questions emerge: when I think I’m following your discourse

and taking the next “logical step” but you think I am
falsifying your most basic intuitions then a difference in
language has emerged. Michael Tomasello, along with many
others has made the argument that we learn language not as
collections of single words with discrete meanings that then
get combined in sentences, or as a series of grammatical
rules applied to single instances of language use, but as pre-
packaged chunks of discourse—phrases, formulas,
commonplaces—that we can repeat appropriately insofar as
we occupy scenes of joint attention with our elders. Over
time our language base extends through discovering iterable
patterns in and analogies with those chunks, noticing similar
contexts, mixing chunks, exchanging elements of the chunks
we are familiar with, and so on. This process never ends,
continuing, say, for academics, when we read the sentences
of one thinker through the sentences we have assimilated
from another. We can identify patterns because we can re-
arrange center-margin relations on scenes and still
recognize a scene as the “same” scene (when I am done
speaking and someone else takes “center stage,” it will still
be the “same” scene); and we can identify analogies
because the materials of one scene can be referred back to
other scenes. Iterating (repeating differently) chunks,
patterns and analogies, that is, is the way we follow by
repairing the line of attention. The novel sentences linguists
note that we are able to compose are, really, then, variant
constructions, and “thinking” a process of transforming

chunks and commonplaces into such variant constructions.
Ethical being involves not so much learning the language of
the other, or teaching the other one’s own language,
because “language” is not a static entity that can stand still
long enough for it to be the same language once it has been
learned as it was when it began being taught. Rather, ethics
involves learning the emergent language that arises at the
margin or rough edges of the convergent idioms. Joint
attention is always liable to lapse, prey to distraction and
fixation, must always be monitored and re-engaged—when
we mistake ourselves and each other it turns out that we
have not been attending to the same thing after all, and our
recourse is to attend to what we normally attend from:
language, or the possibility of joint attention, an indication of
faith in the capacity of shared deferral.
If new language is always emerging on the margins of any
semiotic encounter then two things follow: first, that this
emergent language upsets the rough symmetry of the
originary scene and, as on that scene itself, the new
language can only be engaged through the kind of
asymmetry aimed at symmetry I have elsewhere called
“firstness”; and, second, the hierarchical articulation of
language, from phonemes meaningless in themselves but
capable of meaningful combinations, to morphemes that are
meaningful within larger words, to words which have

meaning but minimally so until they are placed in sentences,
which take on their full meaning in discourses, and so on—
this entire hierarchical organization which makes the lower
levels invisible (we don’t notice phonemes, and barely
individual words, when we are discussing serious issues)
undergoes dislocation and the elements at different levels
become visible and “out of joint.” If we place these two
characteristics of emergent language together, it follows that
firstness, or what we can consider the irreducibly
pedagogical dimension of language, involves attending to
the normally subsumed “joints” of language. Language is
irreducibly pedagogical because in any joint attention,
someone must have pointed first in a more or less articulate
anticipation of the interest of the other(s)—this indicative
initiative is the interpellative act that introduces one into the
attentional loop. At the same time, this pedagogical
dimension is, we could say, “flickering,” insofar as once
attention has been joined that initial asymmetry is integrated
into the newly formed joint attention—and joint attention is
self-authenticating, recognizing only such precursors and
origins as it needs to sustain itself in the face of distractions
and fixations.
The joints of language include far more than the elements of
speech—there is tone, for example, and also within speech
itself there is phonosemantics, but beyond that there is
gesture and posture, which in turn open up onto broader

tacit understandings of context. In interpersonal interaction,
that is, the entire embodied mind (or, perhaps, minded body)
is engaged in the manipulation of attention, while in the more
advanced semiotic forms (writing and electronic
communications) the senses are brought into play in various
ways. There are many joints that an utterance or sign can be
out of. The originary hypothesis, though, provides us with an
effective way of studying, first of all, those semiotic
elements closest to the originary scene: posture and
gesture. The originary gesture is a gesture of aborted
appropriation; doesn’t it make sense, then, to see all
gestures and postures as “aborted” versions of some
threatening activity? Take a large, powerful looking man
walking confidently down the street, head up, chest out, with
long stride and arms swinging long and fast enough to knock
over an average sized individual. On the one hand, he is
taking up space, defending a territory, intimidating potential
trespassers—but, more fundamentally, he is claiming this
space by suggesting, through gesture and posture, not only
what he might do if that space were to be transgressed but
also therefore drawing attention to what he isn’t doing, the
possible actions he has aborted—for example, embarking on
the unrestricted conquest of space. He is claiming some
space, not all of it, and if he claims more than his “fair share,”
that just means one’s notion of fairness, based on modern,
civic notions of equality, is incommensurable with his notion,
based, implicitly, on one’s right to what one can defend. He

does, though, have an understanding of fairness and is
constituting a scene around himself through his gesture and
posture.
Gesture and posture do not seem to work the same way as
the levels of spoken language—they not are composed of a
system of intrinsically meaningless elements, nor are they
components of larger systems of meaning. But they are
composed into larger wholes we call “situations,” “character,”
“personality,” and “culture”; and, as I suggested earlier, it
may very well be that phonemes and, more generally, the
sounds of language are not as meaningless as post-
Saussurian linguistics assumes. Furthermore, we can
integrate gesture and posture into the semiotic systems of
speech, writing and beyond by considering, first, that
gestures and postures are ultimately ostensive gestures of
deferral, and that any meaning conveyed through the higher
speech forms also involves an act of deferral. Eric Gans’s
analysis of the primary linguistic forms in The Origin of
Language makes it possible to see the imperative as a
deferral of the ostensive, under conditions where an
ostensive would likely fail and exacerbate the violence it is
meant to stay (interestingly first turned into an imperative by
the one obeying the command); the declarative, meanwhile,
is a deferral of the imperative, when that speech act is
unlikely to be fulfilled (and hence risk a violent situation
without resolution). There are many different kinds of

ostensives—simple pointing at a desired or interesting
object, promises, greetings, expressions of gratitude, and so
on—and of imperatives—orders issued under emergency
conditions, orders issued pursuant to some legitimate
authority, commands received from divine agencies, or
transmitted within a community and obeyed by generation
after generation—and the analyses based on the principle I
am proposing would get very complex. Indeed, all these
forms of signifying are embedded in single acts, embodying
knowledge on different levels—if I stand aside from that
aggressive male occupying the center of the street, making
my own, limited claim to space and signaling a refusal to
challenge him (learning an emergent language of gesture
and posture), while, perhaps shaking my head at the evident
barbarism and in order to give a moral tincture to my
resentment, I am most likely doing all that on the level of
gesture and posture itself, not in sentences I speak to
myself. All acts have an element of deferral (even if minimal
or diminishing) insofar as one thing is done, and not another,
and it is done in one way, not another, thereby holding back
possibilities towards which the form of the act gestures.
Even in the most intellectualized conversation, such gestural
exchanges proceed unnoted, sometimes emphasizing or
accentuating, sometime subverting, positions taken in the
overt communication. And, finally, this mode of analysis can
be carried forward into writing and electronic
communications insofar as we realize that these take place

within disciplines, genres and institutions with rules that can
be violated and boundaries that can be transgressed and
that each signifying act makes sense by heightening or
singling out respect for at least some of these rules and
boundaries, even if this respect is shown by violating and
transgressing others.
The insistence upon the entanglement of mind and body in
language events evokes the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis that
there are no universally shared cognitive concepts outside of
language: that time and space, as well as cultural and moral
concepts, are all encoded in the grammar and semantics of
specific languages.(1) It seems to me that this claim, if taken
to its logical conclusion, would lead us to assert the
singularity not just of every language but of every speech
act: why should we, that is, assume that shared cognitive
concepts undergird different uses of the same words any
more than uses of “similar” words across languages? And
yet it is very difficult to simply reject the question, since in
our post-metaphysical world thought seems bound up with
language in ways that continue to surprise. I therefore
consider it fortunate that the hypothesis is alive and fairly
well, drawing the interest not only of literary theorists and
poets, but cognitive linguists. This is the case even though
the hypothesis cannot really be formulated coherently—if
you want to claim that we can only think in terms of the
grammar of a particular language you are already begging

the question of the relation between “thought” and
“language,” which the hypothesis nevertheless depends
upon (if we were to just assert the simpler “thought is
language, language is thought [and that is all ye need to
know on earth?)],” the hypothesis would evaporate). I will
suggest in a little while that the best use of the hypothesis is
to identify the “emergent language” I am arguing is central to
ethics, but a good way to get there is through a discussion of
one way in which the hypothesis has proven generative for
some cognitive linguists.
Dan Slobin sums up a problem, derived from linguistic
theories of grammaticalization, and that has been engaging
cognitive linguists, when he points out that “[t]here is a cline
of linguistic elements from fully lexical content words to fully
specialized grammatical morphemes” (426). The cognitive
linguists Dedre Gentner and Lena Boroditsky use this
distinction to modify the Whorfian problem by proposing
what they call a “division of dominance”:
At one extreme, concrete nouns—terms for objects and
animate beings—follow cognitive-perceptual dominance.
They denote entities that can be individuated on the basis of
perceptual experience. At the other extreme, closed-class
terms—such as conjunctions and determiners—follow
linguistic dominance. These meanings do not exist
independent of language. Verbs and prepositions—even

“concrete” motion verbs and spatial prepositions—lie
between. Unlike closed-class terms, they have denotational
functions, but the composition of the events and relations
they denote is negotiated via language. (216-7)
So, at the first extreme, thought is independent of language,
which in practice we can take to mean first, easily and
uncontroversially translatable; and, second, readily reducible
to ostensive, referential gestures. The Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis wouldn’t hold within this domain of dominance:
we could assume a word in any language that would be
roughly equivalent to, say, “tree.” At the other extreme
though, where possible relations are constructed intra-
linguistically, the dependence of thought on language would
be the greatest. We have no reason to assume, for example,
that in other languages things are figured “out.” As Slobin
goes on to point out, though, the process of
grammaticalization relativizes the distinction between the
domains of dominance, since content items make their way
down the “cline” to grammatical ones. “Basic verbs,”
according to Slobin,
appear at the beginnings of grammaticization clines
because, when they are used in a conversational context,
they contrast with the more specific verbs that could be
used in that context, thereby signaling to the hearer that
those more specific meanings were not intended. This opens

the way for the kind of pragmatic inferencing and reanalysis
that lie at the heart of grammaticization.
Given these facts, it is evident that the special character of
grammaticizable notions has its origin, in part, in the lexical
items from which grammatical items are prone to develop.
That is, the “open class” is already organized into general
and specialized terms—and this division can be accounted
for by quite ordinary psycholinguistic and communicative
processes... Why are such words prone to grammaticize?
Because of their generality they are both highly frequent and
likely to be used in contexts in which the speaker does not
intend to communicate a specialized meaning. (433-4)
Slobin goes on to give the example of verbs designating
“taking”—if I use a more specialized verb like “grasp” or
“seize,” I wish to draw attention to the manner of taking
possession; if I use a more general verb like “take” I thereby
draw attention to a more general domain of activity
(watching over, accepting responsibility for, and so on).
“Take” is now primed to enter the process of
grammaticalization, which might involve becoming an
“auxiliary” verb or, in the case of “take” entering into a range
of idioms (take over, take on, take it to, take down, etc.).
The process of grammaticalization is surely shaped, as
Slobin says, “by the online demands on the speaker to be
maximally clear within pragmatic constraints and maximally

efficient within economy constraints, and by online
capacities of the listener to segment, analyze and interpret
the message” (431), which is to say by the interest in
establishing a sustainable form of joint attention—but the
initial, implicit, marking of the distinction between more
general and more specialized semantic domains that Slobin
places at the origin must first of all involve a shift in attention
that involves an experience of learning. I would go even
further, and say that that semantic domain could not have
been imagined until it had been opened up and shared. The
more generalized semantic domain recuperates some
interruption in the attentional loop—I would assume it is
noticed when further descent down the cline would
exacerbate the distraction caused by the interruption and
that it wards off the danger of imminent fixation. What
happens here is that a possibility within language opens a
possibility within thought—the distinction between “take”
and “seize” makes it possible to imagine “taking
responsibility,” or “taking one’s time.”
At this point, originary thinking moves beyond cognitive
linguistics, because we must assume that there were a few
words and then many, and those few words must have
covered more semantic space than the later, specialized
split-offs; even more, the earliest words must have been
more thoroughly embedded in the imperative and gestural-
postural worlds than we can easily reconstruct now. The

original “take,” then, must have included much of what was
to be distributed to more specialized semantic domains. To
“take,” must have meant to acquire and possess in accord
with sacred purposes and ritualized practices. The initial
move towards grammaticalization, then—that transformation
of a word, whose meanings have been evacuated and given
over to specialized terms, into a word covering newly
imagined cognitive, social and moral domains—is a retrieval
of the originary content of the word. This is a retrieval
forward, not a recovery of the identical meaning: “taking
responsibility,” “taking time,” “taking over,” and so on don’t
return us to that earlier ostensive world but, rather, create
new ostensive possibilities of deferral, where promises can
be made (in a promise, one allows oneself to be “taken”),
initiatives “taken,” obligations incurred. In other words, a
backward ascent is a precondition of further descent down
the cline, as the new mode of thinking in language takes over
or becomes common possession. And this also means that
the development of chunks and commonplaces, on the one
hand, and the “de-chunking” that we can call “thinking,” on
the other, are complementary modes of language
development and language learning: “thinking” is initiated
when a piece of a chunk “sticks out” (because the chunk is
used mistakenly, because it is learned so well as to become
material rather than transparent, because it collides with
other chunks...), is withheld from its normal circulation, and
opens up a new grammatical and semantic domain. This

withholding from normal circulation, in fact, conforms to the
structure of deferral, whereby an act is converted into a
gesture—gestures must be composed so as to indicate that
a particular movement could be completed in many other
ways, but is instead being (in)completed in this way. And the
(in)completion in the case of the aborted act/gesture can
also be generalized to a range of as yet unanticipated
situations, whereas acts are bound to a restricted context.
The consequences for ethics of this reciprocal implication
and generation of language and thinking are as follows.
Ethical concepts like “equality” and “fairness” are not really
ideas that people, as folk psychology would have it, believe
in and act upon—for one thing, such terms only have
meaning within some frame of reference; for another thing,
“believe in” and “act upon” are extremely imprecise ways of
determining our relations with signs. These and other terms
take on their meanings not only negatively, as the rejection
of specific, and threatening, forms of inequality and
unfairness, but positively, as exemplified by those who
resisted or renounced the benefits of the inequality or
unfairness in question—and in doing so iterated the originary
event by deferring some kind of (potential, perceived)
communal self-immolation. Such figures serve as iconic
signs that are made the center of ritual (whether religious,
cultural or political), and the actions of those who
commemorate and imitate those figures are themselves

privileged. Generative ethical concepts, then, are those that
clarify the activities of such moral exemplars. Ethical
advances, then, are events that deepen a particular mode of
deferral by bringing within the scope of deferral a
precondition for the act that has been subject to the prior
deferral. Such advances become possible and necessary
when the original deferral has eroded, leaving members of
the community with the choice of abandoning or restoring it
—but the restoration must consist of more than insistence on
the continuance of the frayed practice; it must diagnose and
denounce the cause of the erosion and establish preventive
measures against its recurrence. Hence the need for
“deepening.” When such a restoration or return is
successful, those who represented it—undoubtedly
extremely divisive figures at the time—will have been those
who saved the community. The rest of the community will
then be taken in tow by those who respond most vigorously
to the call of those founders, and by the practices, norms
and institutions they found (or the community will become
prey to its own indiscipline). This also means that the
community need not hold itself to the same degree of rigor
as the founders, only to revere them and preserve the
possibility of perpetual renewal—the role of monasticism in
Christian societies can perhaps be understood in this way:
the point is not that everyone should be chaste, eschew
worldly goods and honors, and devote themselves
exclusively to searching the will of God, but rather that those

called to such renunciation should be honored as models to
imitate, to the extent that one can, in one’s daily life.
A study in ethics, then, can be reduced to the study of those
practices, norms and institutions, which is to say, a study of
disciplines, in the fullest sense of the word(2): including both
systems, individual and collective, of self-control, self-
refinement and self-overcoming, and institutions of inquiry,
characterized by constraints upon observation and
vocabularies of analysis and description. Indeed, ideas are
nothing more than prompts to the construction of
disciplines. And disciplines are constructed within language,
also in the fullest sense of that word—from the ostensive,
postural/gestural realm, up through imperatives,
interrogatives and declaratives to discourse. The initiation of
a discipline involves the recuperation of a word (again, in the
fullest sense—including phrases, idioms, and grammatical
constructions), a word with a disciplinary history, and turning
that word into the center of a new set of constraints. And, I
would argue, that recuperation is a step up the “cline,” or
what I will now call an “upcline,” in which a word is
deliberately removed from a circulation that splinters its
uses, and placed within a new circulation, or idiom, that
treats the word as a prompt for a new hierarchy of
declaratives, imperatives and ostensives. (Perhaps the
prototypical example of the foundational disciplinary move is
Plato’s withdrawal of “good” from its circulation as an

adjective indifferently applied to “meal,” “athlete,” “house,”
etc., to a much more restricted use as the Good.) Disciplines
are spaces set aside for continuous language learning, a
perpetual, deliberate break from ostensive and imperative
uses of signs, uses that habitually provide smooth paths to
satisfaction, to new ways in which, as Tomasello puts in in
describing the young child’s internalization of the linguistic
symbol, we can become aware of how the “current situation
may be attentionally construed by ‘us’” (13).
To   i n s t i t u t e   a   w o r d   i n   t h i s   w a y   i s   t o   c o n s t r u c t   a   r u l e   fo r   i t s
use, a rule designed to prevent other possible usages, and a
rule drawn from some actual or imagined domain of prior
usage. Perhaps the earliest such procedure is the ubiquitous
ban on pronouncing the name of God—the first word. If the
name of God is interdicted, then a system of circumlocutions
and euphemisms, drawing on putative “attributes” and
“effects” of God, must be elaborated. Interdicting the name
of God is one step beyond (a deepening of) the interdiction
on appropriating God. The rules of politeness and civility
work in a similar way, expressing through procedures applied
to tone, gesture, and so on, one’s commitment to not do
certain things. In each case what is deferred is the
blasphemous, coarse, brutal, barbaric—some form of violent
appropriation. As Philip Rieff has argued, though, any system
of interdictions includes a system of remissions: profane and
forbidden practices that are allowed within a circumscribed

space, like Bakhtin’s “carnivalesque.” The internal
disintegration of a system of sacrality comes when the
remitted practices are used to point out the “hypocrisy” of
the defenders of the sacred and to reverse the causality
between deferral and authority—that is, instead of authority
being conferred upon those who submit themselves to
greater ordeals of deferral, the system of deferral and
discipline becomes seen as a mere justification of the
privileges enjoyed by those with authority. Of course, there
will often be quite a bit of accuracy in such charges, but we
can distinguish attempts to dismantle discipline from calls to
restore it insofar as the former turn their satirical weapons
against the latter. A priori hostility towards the sacred and
sacred authority, the central fixation of the modern world,
and unremitting mockery of such authority, the source of its
distractions, always serve the purpose of releasing
inhibitions in the name of nature. Those who have been
liberated from inhibitions while still in possession of the
entire vocabulary of discipline towards the destruction of
which they have dedicated themselves have considerable
advantages over the defenders of deferral and discipline.
This is the advantage exploited for quite a while by Marxism
in which, in Michael Polanyi’s terms
[s]cientific skepticism and moral perfectionism join forces...
in a movement denouncing any appeal to moral ideals as
futile and dishonest. Its perfectionism demands a total

transformation of society; but this utopian project is not
allowed to declare itself. It conceals its moral motives by
embodying them in a struggle for power, believed to bring
about automatically the aims of utopia... The power of
Marxism lies in uniting the two contradictory forces of the
modern mind into a single political doctrine. Thus originated
a world-embracing idea. In which moral doubt is frenzied by
moral fury and moral fury is armed by scientific nihilism. (59-
60)
Understandably, it took liberal citizens quite a while to find
means of defending themselves from this combination of
frenzy and scientific nihilism disguised as oscillations
between skepticism and certainty; perhaps they have not yet
completely learned how to do so.
A proliferation of disciplines comes in the wake of the
decline of a shared sacrality—God is no longer named, but
the word/names that found the disciplines (“society,”
“unconscious,” “nature,” etc.) are nonetheless attributes of
that which arrests some act of appropriation and instigates
shared acts of attention. Any discipline is based upon some
form of deferral, and upon some innovative rule of language
and, therefore, any discipline adds to our collected means of
discerning ethical exemplarity. Even if we take the most
extreme apparent counter-example, the euphemistic
“language rules” by which the Nazis conspired to avoid overt

references to the mass murder they were committing in the
very documents facilitating and recording that mass murder,
we can see why this is the case. In itself, an Oulipo-style
language game devised to discuss horrific acts obliquely
through rules regarding the uses of synonyms, periphrasis
and other methods might be very interesting and instructive,
providing markers of the devastation crimes against
humanity wreak upon our language (or, perhaps, revealing
the vulnerability of our bureaucratic language to totalitarian
infiltration); in cases where one is trying to aid victims of
such acts, such language games might be a necessarily
tactful approach towards enabling the survivor to arrive at
his own language for describing what he has undergone.
They are only objectionable when they serve to distract
others from the fixation upon the destruction of disciplines
driving the murderers, playing upon most people’s
unwillingness to assume that anyone would be capable of
such acts (or, less generously, most people’s desire not to
accept the responsibility such knowledge would bring with
it) and consequent willingness to put the most charitable
construction upon the euphemisms. In that case, the Nazis’
resort to such language rules indeed contributes to our
capacity for ethical assessment because the euphemisms
break down in response to a demand to be provided with the
referents that even bureaucratic discourse must ultimately
supply.

Euphemistic discourse is ultimately a question of
bureaucracy, central to market and democratic societies
where everything is recorded and innumerable disputes
must be publicly adjudicated according to ever accumulating
rules. Since bureaucracies must both record and neutralize
conflicts, euphemism is intrinsic to their functioning. They do
so by ensuring all positions are included in the system and
ensuring that any position that can’t be named by
bureaucratic vocabulary is rendered invisible and
unthinkable. But part of that system is the mechanisms by
which the invisible and unthinkable can be named within the
system. As more of these processes go online and are
governed by algorithms resistant to influence by the
subjects of bureaucracy, it seems likely that important
ethical questions will cluster around what is a set of
globalized processes of normalization. The terms I have
been developing here can address the question of
bureaucratic language rules as follows: the way
bureaucracies direct the attention of the bureaucrats
themselves can be along the same line of attention as that
provided for their subjects, or the subjects can be turned
into objects of attention, treated as nothing more than
potential distractions. The way we can tell the difference is
by determining whether language learning takes place
between the two sides. Can the bureaucratic terms be used
outside of the bureaucracy and are bureaucratic terms
permeable enough to allow for the borrowing of outside

terms? Even more precisely, do the bureaucrats (in the very
broad sense that anyone who publicly assesses others,
including doctors, teachers, lawyers, and so on, could be
considered one) treat their “charges” in such a way that
assumes that those charges might one day, however distant
or unlikely, themselves enter the bureaucracy and perform
assessments themselves. These questions can only be
answered performatively. The sign that the answer is “no”
will be that outside idioms are diagnosed rather than
integrated, and treated as symptoms of whatever is
abnormalized by the bureaucrats. But such symptomatic
approaches to the subject licenses exceptions to
established procedure, exceptions that then become
codified within established procedure. The licensing of
exceptions is the licensing of the very desires that must be
deferred if rulers are to be fit to rule—in this case, what
might be the central modern desire, to rule humans
effectively, without resistance, as the scientist handles his
objects. And the licensing of those desires entails the
discrediting of the source of their prohibition, and this
discrediting must become a fixation since any interference in
the fulfillment of the once prohibited desires comes to be
treated in the most inimical way. In that case, we can see
totalitarianisms, leaving aside the specific ideologies
informing them, as titanic explosions of forbidden desires,
above all the desires to dominate absolutely, murder, avenge
real and perceived injuries, and humiliate. That totalitarian

movements are disinhibitory rather than disciplinary thus
becomes transparent. But we need not set aside the specific
ideologies, since Nazism and Communism are themselves
nothing more than elaborate justifications for such a
“weaponizing” of bureaucracy; but bureaucracies must now
be assumed to be potential “incubators” of such outbreaks,
and their monitoring a significant, if not central, concern of
ethical thinking.
Proceduralist tendencies in modern art are part of this
process of monitoring. Producing a work according to an
arbitrary rule is preparatory for noting and countering
bureaucratic potentialities: the random undoes the
increasingly precise probabilism claimed, if not actually
accomplished, by contemporary bureaucracies. In that case,
any language game, or constraint, any placing of some piece
of language within a restricted circulation, serves an ethical
purpose insofar as the paradoxicality of the rule is not
neutralized (and when it is, the rule can be re-presented
along with the paradoxicality of that attempt at
neutralization). It is decreasingly possible to accept the claim
of ancient revelations that the arbitrary has been removed
from those revelations, leaving nothing but a historically and
anthropologically necessary “content”—indeed, the originary
hypothesis introduces into any revelation the paradox of the
originary scene, that what is named as significant in any
revelation is presumed to already have the significance it can

in fact only have via the act of naming. In that case, we can
start from the opposite extreme, with the assertion that any
constraint, even or especially the most arbitrary (say, a rule
against using a particular letter), provides ethical benefits.
Some kind of “upcline,” necessarily results from any
constraint, as words (in the broadest sense) are shoved out
of joint and become newly available objects of attention, as
long as the shared attention it facilitates doesn’t serve to
distract attention from some fixation hoping to evade
scrutiny. Further, any upcline enhances our capacity for joint
attention, which can then always, even if slightly, be
transferred to the reconstruction of other constraints. It is
also helpful to consider how much of the arbitrary is involved
in disciplinary constructions that have come to seem
reflections of nature—we can readily see, by now, that, for
example, Freud’s re- and restricted circulation of the
“unconscious,” and Marx’s of “labor power,” had a great deal
of the arbitrary to them (and there was much that was
intellectually generative in that arbitrariness)—but such
insights come much harder with prominent disciplines closer
to home. If one were inclined to devise a “proof” for the
originary hypothesis, it seems to me we might find one in the
fact that it works equally well if we assume that those on the
originary scene reflected, with the skill of the great realist
novelists, the nature of all those congregated; or, on the
other hand, that the originary sign was a contingent,
arbitrary construct, arrived at in desperation, thoroughly

pragmatic, devoid of ontological claims, and providing
nothing more than a rule to cling to. Without an originary
hypothesis, other disciplines in the humanities and social
sciences, to differing extents of course, smuggle in a lot of
naturalized assumptions in order to keep the arbitrariness of
their constructions at bay—they presuppose a good deal of
humanness in the constructions of the human. There’s no
reason to object to that, but recognizing the ingredients of
arbitrariness and idiosyncrasy in the mainstream disciplines
might make them more generative of insights and less
tolerant of complacent euphemisms. In the end, perhaps the
best way of distinguishing the production of new, upclining
idioms from obfuscatory euphemisms is that only former can
read the latter into a new space by inhabiting the paradoxes
of both, indeed all, sets of rules.(3) The euphemism is the
tribute evil must pay to joint attention and it can always be
taken up so as to direct attention towards the complex of
distraction and fixation constitutive of the euphemism.
Ethical behavior in everyday life, then, relies on the creation
of little disciplinary spaces out of the available semiotic
material. This doesn’t mean that all those who “just” treat
others as they would like to be treated are unethical; it just
means that what, at a given moment and in a given situation,
they take to count as “treating others as they would like to
be treated” is “down cline,” further grammaticized, from the
procedures devised to refuse to participate in a newly

perceived form of unequal treatment. Even more, in any
action recognizable as ethical, we will be able to identify
some “upclining,” however minimal and however mixed with
“remittances.” It follows that ethical inquiries are best
devoted to the exemplary practices initiating new
procedures and the way those practices are imagined across
various spaces of discipline and deferral. Some potentially
exemplary practices must be winning out over others—
others that allow for too little remission, or that are too
blatantly arbitrary. (I happen to believe that a community
that, every week, chooses to omit a specific sound or letter
from its oral or written communications, will be, all other
things being equal, more ethical than a community that
doesn’t. Probably happier, too. But such a procedure would
not address what the community itself takes to be ethical
dilemmas, something new disciplinary procedures must at
least gesture towards. Some distinction between newly
generalized/retrieved term and more specialized
instantiations will be necessary to constitute the space.)
My discussion, thus far, conflates religious, cultural, esthetic
and scientific practices under the category of the
“disciplinary.” I think this is essentially correct, insofar as all
of these disciplinary spaces, to the extent that they become
more rigorously disciplinary, make society more ethical; even
more, they contribute to a vision, like Michael Polanyi’s, of a
free society comprised of a vast extent of overlapping

disciplinary spaces (what Polanyi calls a “society of
explorers”). And while differentiations need to be made
across these practices, the best way to do so is to attend to
the ways in which they impinge upon one another, rather
than trying to establish an a priori ethical hierarchy amongst
them. Scientific disciplines that account, in their initiation of
new learners, for the esthetic dimension in the attraction and
intelligibility of any theory and in the construction of
hypotheses, and that honor the “awe” at the unknown that
leads one to replace everyday modes of perception with
concepts that address the intangible will “upcline” more than
those which imagine themselves to be purely “declarative”
spaces. Artistic communities that account for their overlap
with the sacred and the scientific, perhaps in inventing
language rules that mimic the sacred, or in using
mathematized procedures in generating rules of
composition, will upcline more and be more ethical than
those that don’t; and those religious practices that invite the
esthetic and rename as God’s work the discoveries of
science while reminding scientists that their disciplines, too,
have scenic origins, will have more upcline than those that
don’t. In each case language learning is maximized because
other discourses are allowed to induce the kind of semiotic
crises that allow for new problems of language to emerge
between us.
David Olson, near the conclusion of his study of the role of

education in literate and therefore bureaucratic societies,
asserts that
In a modern bureaucratic world, knowledge, virtue and ability
take on new form. Institutions such as science preempt
knowledge, justice systems preempt virtue, and functional
roles preempt general cognitive ability. Thus, ability,
knowledge and virtue are construed and pursued less in the
form of private mental states and moral traits of individuals
than in the form of competence in the roles, norms, and rules
of the formal bureaucratic institutions in which they live and
work. (288)
Olson is, of course, right, and yet “we can conclude with x
degree of certainty that, given the assessment of evidence
according to the established procedures, subject to follow
up research regarding certain inconclusive results...” cannot
completely replace “I think that...”; nor can “the aggregate
well-being of the community, measured according to the
following metrics and subject to international comparison, is
likely to decline...” completely replace “I refuse to...”. “If,” as
Olson continues, “these institutions fall apart, personal
competence and private virtues tend to vanish with them,” it
is equally the case that without reserves of personal
competence and private virtues that are not solely
dependent upon these institutions, the institutions will fall
apart. (Why, after all, shouldn’t modern bureaucratic

institutions, once up and running, be perpetually and
automatically self-reproducing?) These reserves are located,
in part, in other institutions that import, as I have suggested,
idioms at odds with the discipline in question (if all
institutions are equally exhausted, though, these reserves
will not be forthcoming). Change within disciplines come, as
Thomas Kuhn most famously argued, from the emergence of
anomalies that can no longer be reconciled with the
prevailing research program. It’s hard to see how the
competency in roles and rules Olson refers to would enable
one to identify, look for, or even anticipate the existence of
such anomalies, though, since anomalies will by definition
undermine those roles and rules. Only living in anomalies
and paradoxes, originary thinking, iterating the oscillation
between model and rival, sign and object, name and
meaning, can sustain the generativity of the disciplines.
Upclining is originary thinking—retrieving the word forward,
withholding a more general meaning yet to be instantiated
from the general semantic circulation, is the way of living in
anomalies and paradoxes. It may be true that “I think that...”
and “I refuse to...” are no longer worth very much but we can
“post” ourselves within disciplines, iterating distracting
entrances that allow for attention to be directed to the
discipline as such, and attention to disciplinarity is the form
attention to scenicity takes today.
The definition of ethics as upclining might, finally, allow us to

revisit the critique of White Guilt and victimary discourse
that has become such an important part of Generative
Anthropology. White Guilt could, perhaps, be reframed as a
deepening of the modes of deferral constitutive of liberalism
and democracy, that is, as a targeting of previously invisible
preconditions and predilections that make the members of
free societies more likely to advocate or remain silent in the
face of violence against despised minorities. Language rules
like referring to the “N-word” and, more generally, avoiding
verbal formulations that single out members of particular
groups and make them more likely to face scrutiny that
might accord with collective probabilities (say, the greater
proportion of black perpetrators of violent crime in the US)
but would be unjust when applied to the individual, could be
ethical advances. For this to be the case, though, the rules
would have to apply to anyone within the “game,” that is,
anyone who has “standing” to hold another to the rules—
whether this would mean that, for example, the “N-word”
would be equally off-limits for blacks, or that it would be
assumed that any black individual would have his own
“blacks” before whom he would be expected to experience a
form of White Guilt, or whether a complementary form of
“Black Guilt” marking the desire for revenge against the
oppressor might emerge, or something else altogether,
could not be determined in advance. But new forms of
deferral for some that are simultaneously remissions or
invitations to transgression for others are unsustainable, and

for the same reason that one person can’t play chess while
the other is playing checkers—a complete confusion of the
rules results, ultimately “liberating” everyone from discipline.
But without deferral and discipline values can only be
derived by reversing the hierarchy between
deferral/discipline and authority, so that values descend
from the perpetual exposure of hypocrisy, and the liberated
are delivered to the competition to commit the
transgressions that expose the biggest gap between
assertions of deferral and actual appropriation.
The cognitive linguistics from which I have drawn much of
my discussion of language learning, joint attention and
disciplinarity speaks, like the phenomenological and Gestalt
traditions of which it is at least a distant cousin, of
“intentionality.” This is also the language of GA. I insist,
though, on making “attentionality” the prior, constitutive
concept. I certainly don’t deny intentionality, in the sense of
“intending” an object and so constituting and conferring
meaning upon that object against a relatively
undifferentiated background; nor, even, as a locus of
interpretive retrieval of the meaning of texts and acts.
Intentionality within GA is more strongly conceived, as the
object is one of mimetic desire and shared deferral. But
intentionality depends upon having one’s attention drawn to
the object, and having one’s attention drawn depends upon
attending to another who brings the object into view and,

finally, upon becoming an object of attention of others (an
attention one can’t share). Seeing this broader attentional
loop as the condition of possibility of intentionality enables
the inquirer to direct attention to that in intentionality that is
constitutively excluded and yet constitutive; to put it another
way, “attentionality” provides a way of accounting for the
alterity in language, that which in my utterances is not
“mine” but is, rather, passing through me and carrying me
along. The acknowledgment of the alterity of language,
which we owe primarily to the various post-structuralist or
post-humanist theories, makes it impossible to speak of the
generic human (which would presuppose some universally
shared world-as-scene and construct alterity as deviance)
and imperative to speak of fields of human being:
disciplinarity, or the iteration of a particular attentional loop
in a way that makes the boundary between intentionality and
alterity in language productive. Productive because
knowingly composing a version of the human, and one open
to the gazes issuing from other versions, through which
come other gazings from more distant but maybe, once
attended to within the disciplinary space, more intimate,
overlapping spaces.
Works Cited
Althusser, Louis, and Etienne Balibar. Reading Capital.
Translated by Ben Brewster. London: New Left Books, 1972.

Bowerman, Melissa, and Stephen C. Levinson, eds.
Language Acquisition and Conceptual Development.
Language, Culture, and Cognition 3. Cambridge, UK; New
Yo r k :   C a m b r i d g e   U n i ve rs i t y   P re ss ,  2 0 0 1.
Gans, Eric. “Originary Ethics.” The Chronicles of Love and
Resentment. No. 431. September 15, 2012.
http://anthropoetics.ucla.edu/views/vw431.htm
Gentner, Dedre, and Lera Boroditsky. “Individuation,
Relativity and Early Word Learning,.” in In Language
Acquisition and Conceptual Development, edited by Melissa
Bowerman and Stephen C. Levinson, ed.,214-56. Language,
Culture, and Cognition 3. Cambridge, UK; New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2001. 214-256.
Hall, Stephen S. “Repairing Bad Memories.” MIT Technology
Review, Monday June 17, 2013,
http://m.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/515981/repairi
ng-bad-memories/.
Kriss, Sam. “Book of Lamentations.” The New Inquiry.
October 18, 2013. http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/book-of-
lamentations/
Lawrence, D.H. D.H. Lawrence and Italy: Twilight in Italy. Sea
and Sardinia. Etruscan Places. New York:, Penguin Books,
1972.

Lucy, John A. Language Diversity and Thought: A
Reformulation of the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis.
Studies in the Social and Cultural Foundations of Language.
12. Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press,
1992.
Olson, David R. Psychological Theory and Educational
Reform: How School Remakes Mind and Society.
Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press,
2003.
Polanyi, Michael. The Tacit Dimension. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1966.
Rieff, Philip. Charisma: The Gift of Grace and How It Has
Been Taken From Us. New York: Vintage, 2008.
Slobin, Dan I. “Form-function Relations: How do Children
Find out What They Are?” In Language Acquisition and
Conceptual Development, edited by Melissa Bowerman and
Stephen C. Levinson, 406-449. Cambridge, UK; New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Sloterdijk, Peter. You Must Change Your Life. Translated by
Wieland Hoban. Cambridge, UK; Malden, MA: Polity Press,
2013.
To m a s e l l o ,   M i c h a e l . Constructing a Language: A User-Based
Theory of Language Acquisition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press, 2005.
Whorf, Benjamin Lee. Language, Thought and Reality:
Selected Writings. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1956.
Notes
1. For discussions of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, the best
place to begin is Whorf’s Language, Thought and Reality; for
a more recent discussion, see John A. Lucy, Language
Diversity and Thought: A Reformulation of the Linguistic
Relativity Hypothesis, Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1992. (back)
2. Such a study has gotten well under way in Peter
Sloterdijk’s You Must Change Your Life, albeit not on the
linguistic terms I will propose here. (back)
3. For a very enlightening and enjoyable example of the kind
of thing I have in mind, or at least one kind, see Sam Kriss’s
“The New Lamentations,” an essay in the online journal The
New Inquiry that reads Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition as a dystopian novel:
http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/book-of-lamentations/. In
this way, it seems to me, a hypothetical origin of psychiatry
from which the discipline could be imagined to have
deviated is indirectly proposed, and therefore a possible
post within the discipline. (back)

