

The Esthetic, the Sacred, and
Originary Modernity
Adam Katz
Department of English
Quinnipiac University
Hamden, CT 06518
Adam.Katz@quinnipiac.edu
In a fairly recent Chronicle of Love & Resentment (326),
“Return of the Sacred I–the Sacred and the Significant,” Eric
Gans focuses on the distinction between the “sacred” and
the “significant”: “the sacred cannot be reduced to the
significant; if the two terms were synonymous, we would not
need both.” The sacred “reproduc[es] the configuration of
the originary event in a more or less formalized manner as
ritual”; meanwhile, “language, in contrast, is typically a one-
on-one phenomenon; as a self-contained gesture that has
renounced any role in worldly action, the linguistic sign has
no minimal energy requirement.” But the qualification, in a
part of the passage referring to the sacred I omitted, that
“The sacred tends to inhere in stable religious institutions”
[emphasis on “tends to” mine], points to the possibility of a
form of sacrality that need not inhere in ritual. Indeed, Gans
concludes this Chronicle by presenting the significant less in

contrast to the sacred than as a more minimal form of it:
From the institutional standpoint of ritual, this
utterance [i.e., the Word of God] is constrained by
the event as a whole, but from the formal
standpoint of language, it is in principle a free act
whose meaning is constrained by its situation in
the event, so that the freedom to utter the sign
outside its originary context does not entail the
freedom to alter what it signifies. The sacred
inheres in the “profane” use of language in the
constraint of meaning that binds the sign
independently of any ritual context. This minimal
sacred inherent in the laws of language is too weak
to support a god or a law of ritual sacrifice; it can
guarantee only the most parsimonious of
anthropologies.
Here, the scare quotes around “profane” seem to suggest
that the use of the term is metaphorical, which is to say this
marked usage is straining against the constraints of the
situation in the speech event; and, if it is not altering what it
signifies, “profane” must be another word for “sacred,” a
euphemism which is necessary insofar as we associate the
sacred exclusively with ritual. If we release the sacred from
this association (if we change the situation), we can amplify
the tension implicit in the use of “profane” so as to scrutinize

what is directly below designated a “weak” sacrality, since
the only measure of such weakness is that provided by the
assumption of that very association. If we abandon that
assumption, the strength of any mode of sacrality must
reside in the strength of the “will that opposes the
participants’ desire to possess the central object” (Chronicle
326). And there is no reason why the strength of that will
must depend upon the presence of ritual.
Rather than viewing the significant as an attenuated form of
the sacred, we can re-frame the issue by attributing
“significance” to the sign and sacrality to the object. Both
sign and object are constituted in terms of their material and
immaterial dimensions. My hypothesis here will be that we
can construct a chiastic relationship between sign and
object, wherein the sign in its materiality points to the
immaterial object while the sign in its immateriality renders
the material object accessible. The material is what makes
the sign a singular semblance; the immaterial is whatever
makes it the “same” sign across its various uses. The more
we attend to the sign’s distinctiveness and irreplaceability in
a given scenic setting, the more its details appear dictated
by the imitation of the repellant (immaterial) power of the
object; the more we address it as iterable, the more we
attend to the horizontal imitation of the users by each other
and to their preparing (therefore) for the sparagmos of the
(material) object. Gans, in Signs of Paradox points out that

the “significance of the central object and its sacrality refer
to different relationships: the object is sacred for resisting
the gesture of appropriation, it is significant for demanding
the gesture of representation” (107).(1) I am suggesting that
the “demand” is made by the object as sacred and, even
more, the “lineaments” of the sign are dictated by the
central, sacred Being. Similarly, I am suggesting a slight
modification in Gans’ observation that the “signified is the
trace of the referent made by the absence of the
sparagmos” (109). While Gans’ formulation would defer the
arrival of the sign’s (immaterial) meaning until after the
sparagmos, my own would suggest that the sparagmos itself
only becomes possible due to the emergence of the
immaterial signified: my reasoning here lies in the necessity
that the sign must already be repeated on the originary
scene and, as I will go on to suggest momentarily, this
iteration of the sign should be seen as regulating the
sparagmos as well.
On the originary scene, the sign is put forth by the first user;
which it to say, when it is put forth it is not yet sign; it
becomes a “little bit” more sign when it is imitated by the
second and then third, and “more and more” all the way until
the nth and final user. The use of quantitative terms here is
inadequate but unavoidable and harmless as long as we
recognize a threshold at which the sign is deliberately
“enough” copied so as to take its “authority” from the newly

immaterial object whose centrifugally repulsive force is now
being imitated and conducted. The sign would become a
recognizable material object in its own right once we could
(and they did) conceivably distinguish between more and
less effective iterations; and this material form would emerge
simultaneously with the sacrality of the object. It is this
recognizable, formed, sign that then facilitates a roughly
equal division and consumption of the object; which is to say
in its (the sign’s) unity, the recognizable sign provides a
minimally abstract measure of divisibility allowing for an
orderly consumption. We might think about this in terms of
the members of the group repeating the sign in the course of
consumption in both “defensive” and “aggressive”
maneuvers aimed at determining the roughly fair share. In
this case, the iteration and, we must assume, refinement of
the physical form of the sign is completed once it provides
this measure and thereby regulates, as an abstract “rule,” the
activity of the group; and this activity re-materializes the
object by making it available for consumption. Insofar as the
sign provides such an abstract rule (once we know how, and
what it means to, act upon or “implement” it), the sign has
thereby been immaterialized.
This formulation is meant to address a serious problem we
confront when we pursue the implications of my claim that
the presence of the sacred cannot be diminished in any
society: in a post-ritual order, what, exactly, is the “central

object”? The whole point of moving past the ritual order
would have been to transcend the limitations imposed upon
our ability to defer violence within traditional forms: even the
slightest weakening of the efficacy of the ritual would pose a
deadly threat insofar as ritual breakdown would be
immediately followed by a rush to the center and a general
conflagration. In a post-ritual order, there are many objects
and they are distributed through the market in a de-
centralized manner; hence there is no center to converge
upon; or, we have what Gans has called an “omni-centrism.”
In that case, though, our own analysis becomes just as
omni-centric. The value of the concept of omni-centrism is
that we are attuned to the vast multiplicity of esthetic self-
creations that defer violence in post-millennial culture; the
limit of the concept is that originary thinking would logically
have to concede that it is no more than another localized
center, another form of self-creation. GA would dissolve, like
Marxism presumably would have in a fully developed
communist order, into the social order it has prophesied.
Which would be fine, if such an order didn’t require—and if
GA, as a thinking of the center, wasn’t uniquely qualified to
offer—critical reflection capable of transcending the daily
verdicts of the market.
I am willing to wager that such an order does require such
reflection because unqualified omni-centrism would further
mean that the participants in the market are incapable of

defending it from those who would pool their individual
resentments and would have none of the difficulties or
compunctions of normal participants in organizing and
directing their resentments against a single and clearly
defined target—that target being the market itself, figured as
a kind of central intelligence that unfairly distributes access
to its products. I would suggest that this configuration is
intrinsic not only to market society but also to the originary
scene upon which, if we are to presuppose a first signifier,
we must posit a last. This “last” user might be hypothesized
as one or more who refused or did not have the chance to
voluntarily accede to the emission of the sign, who
submitted due to the combined force of the emergent
community, to its imminent use, or as an automatic response
to what appears to be the typical operation of the pre-
human pecking order. For this subject, not only would the
central object/intelligence appear to be an intrinsically unjust
fraud, distributing benefits in accord with inscrutable and
arbitrary norms, but also it would be more sharply perceived
as intelligence, with each outcome seeming to be the result
of self-interested calculation.
The anthropology of the “last” is that of Othello’s Iago:
humans are indeed equal, but in their determination to turn
the constitutive biases of the system in their favor. That is,
Iago, as well, is liberated by the market system. For the last,
the center is nothing more than the combined force of the

community operating under the aegis of the sacred center
(which both makes its hypocrisy more outrageous and make
individual members easier to gull) constitutive of the
community. The center, then, is nothing more than
rationalizing, calculating intelligence. The center’s claims to
legitimacy therefore mask a distributive logic which can most
effectively be manipulated by those capable of unmasking
and thereby appropriating that mode of intelligence. This
form of resentment, while it is the source of evil, provides us
with insight into the form actually taken by the intelligence of
the center. Since the resentment of the last(s) introduces
rivalries amongst the participants on the scene (any of
whom, after all, could turn out to be last and hence to be
tempted by the short-cuts made available to lastness), the
conductivity of the intelligence of the center would then be a
product of the need to counter every claim of bias and fraud
with claims and arrangements demonstrating that the
system works to gradually de-link “pre-existing conditions”
from outcomes. The paradox here is that both the market
and constitutional government derive their superiority from
the absence of any requirement that most citizens transcend
the specific scenes upon which they stand and measure
themselves. But that derivation of superiority is possible only
if some will represent the intelligence of the center as a
coherent institutional logic articulating spontaneity and
complexity. And it is no more clear that the system is
equipped to produce as many of such “guarantors” as might

be needed, than it is clear that the conditions prior to the
emission of the originary sign “produced” the capacity to
emit it.
The lasts, by themselves, could not threaten society, except
at the margins. It is the alliance of the lasts with the products
of the ongoing crisis in firstness in the post-Christian West
that constitutes at least one, and the more aggressive,
tendency constitutive of modernity. My argument here is that
delinking the distinction between sacred and secular, on the
one hand, and between sacred and profane, on the other,
will provide us with greater analytical power in distinguishing
between the different trends and possibilities within
modernity. Rather than sacred and secular, I would propose
we distinguish between the liturgical and the secular, as
different modes of sacrality conferring upon either God or
humans respectively the generative power constitutive of a
given institution or practice. The profane, as distinguished
from the sacred, then, are “outstanding” desires and
resentments: that is to say, those desires and resentments
that can be normalized, or that remain within the prevailing
cultural categories. Forms of sacrality, or hallowed sites,
whether liturgical or secular in origin and character, would be
the islands of transcendence framing and channeling those
desires and resentments.
Modernity emerges out of the crisis of the unified Christian

world of the late medieval period, so it would be most
economical to assume that modernity would best be
understood to consist of overlapping revisions of the
Christian revelation. The Christian revelation, in Gans’
account, is that anyone who insistently asserts and
represents the universalization of the mode of reciprocity
implicit in the Judaic revelation of “God as the declarative
sentence” will thereby bring upon himself universal
antagonism. Jesus’s would be the sacrifice to end all
sacrifices: insofar as we recognize our own complicity in the
crucifixion we would recoil from our tendency to seek out
scapegoats to account for social crises, thereby liberating
our capacity to construct institutions which reinforce
solidarity. While the maintenance of Christianity would seem
to depend upon the willingness of some to step forward as
martyrs, as representatives of Christ and as defenders of the
faith, for most people it is enough to acknowledge the
sacrifice only in ritualized forms. A Christian society, then,
would not be one in which everyone takes up the cross and
literally imitates Christ, but one in which the ever-present
possibility of doing so is explicitly acknowledged and
instances of actually doing so are honored and remembered.
Once the specific liturgical forms in which this
acknowledgement is bound up can no longer defer the new
forms of rivalry and violence attendant upon the emergence
of increasingly independent political entities, two broad

possibilities, I would suggest, present themselves. One
would be to propose a sign positing a kind of “Church-
Absolutist complex” as the source of conflict. All the forces
coming together to initiate the modern world—the urban
bourgeoisie, previously or potentially independent nations
swallowed up by the early modern empires, freethinkers—
would find their own internal differences minimized by such
a sign pointing toward such a “complex” as the primary
source of conflict. We now know even better than its
creators did that the indictment of the absolutist monarch
and the priest disseminating myths and lies as the twin
villains against which the modern could define itself has had
a staying power well beyond the life-span of that alliance:
the Marxist notion of ideology as “false consciousness,” still
prevalent in more careful formulations on the Left, essentially
defines political absolutism and religious delusion as the
Other of the Truth possessed by the rationalist subject,
defined, tautologically, as one who is free from and sees
through such myths.
Rather than simply jettisoning the Christian event, though,
this would-be sceneless Enlightenment produces a parody
of it: the founding, traumatic event of the anti-scenic
Enlightenment is the martyrdom of that very rationalist
subject, whose sacrifice is the central item on the indictment
issued against the Church-Absolutist complex. We can trace
a line of events, from Galileo’s persecution to the Inquisition

and up until “McCarthyism,” which all share, in the imaginary
of the potential victims at any rate, the same essential
structure: freethinkers hunted down as heretics in the name
of “order” but in fact serving as scapegoats frightening the
masses in order to resolve some internal crisis on terms
favorable to the powers that be. To put it in contemporary
terms (terms, of course, largely shaped by such narratives),
in recognizing our desire to lynch the freethinker, we accept
our complicity in unjust hierarchies and outmoded
mythologies. The Christian account sees such complicity as
constitutive and beyond our power to eliminate within
history. For the desacralizing Enlightenment, the martyrdom
of the freethinker calls upon us to eliminate such structures
once and for all; but by virtue of that call for elimination, it in
fact entrenches such structures permanently because, as I
just suggested, defining one’s own access to truth in terms
of the Other’s distance from it presents an ever receding
horizon. If my analysis here is correct, it would dramatically
reduce the difference between the radical Enlightenment
and the Romanticism invented by Rousseau, which also
involves a kind of inverted version of the Christian scene in
the sacrifice of the marginal individual by “society.”
The other possible remaking of the Christian scene would
involve a retrieval of an Old Testament-inspired “political
Hebraism”: a form of republicanism defined territorially and
institutionally as a way of situating a people within a series of

historical trials, each of which requires a return to the
founding, prompting a new birth of freedom articulated in a
restored covenant. The supplementation of the New with the
Old Testament paradoxically allows Christianity to remain at
the center of the social order precisely by not relying upon a
direct imitation qua parodic subversion of the Christian
event. In other words, without the burden of anti-Christian
resentment, the general possibility of new institutional forms
consecrated in events dedicated to freedom can be
abstracted from the specific liturgical form in which such a
possibility has been preserved and consequently applied to
all activity, political, artistic, scientific, and so on. Instead of
reinventing and parodying the crucifixion, a republican
Enlightenment continues to bear witness to the singularity of
the Christian revelation by creating the position of the
guarantor who protects potential martyrs and tries to make
such martyrdom unnecessary precisely by remaining alive to
the possibility that it might take place anywhere, anytime,
and in unanticipated forms, supplementing without
subverting the Christian model. Inventing, refining and
defending rules aimed at minimizing scapegoating would
provide the opening for free exchange, free speech, free
movement and private property at the center of the
republican Enlightenment. We could write the history of
modernity as that of the tension between these two forms,
from the struggles of the English and Dutch against the
Spanish Empire, to the British struggle for New World

dominance over the French, to the American founding, up
through the struggle against the 20
th
 century
totalitarianisms and the presence of today’s divergent paths
separating Europe and America.
This latter, originary, modernity allows for the proliferation of
spaces where firstness, in forms of freedom that can then be
packaged and distributed in the marketplace, is possible;
while it is precisely such spaces that victimary discourses,
made up of the combination and collectivization of
Romanticism and radical Enlightenment, take to be ever
more cleverly disguised, powerful and insidious forms of
scapegoating. Originary modernity can defend the sacred
center or what I have called here the intelligence of the
center insofar as it takes that intelligence to be bound up in
institutions—the global market and nationally based
constitutional self-government—that can be modified and
re-shaped as needed to account for new rivalries and
resentments. But it is precisely this adaptability and flexibility
that accelerates the victimary stampede.
If what most enrages, though, is precisely the impersonal
workings of the “machinery” of the marketplace and
government—because it is this impersonality that is taken as
a threat to the integrity of the freethinker, the uniqueness of
the romantic subject, which is to say, seen as a mere front
perpetrating fraud upon the “lasts”—the affirmation of

articulations of hallowed sites provides us with a response to
the rage. Inherited from Christianity and Judaism, embedded
in the marketplace and constitutional government alike, the
sacrality becomes, through its extension beyond its liturgical
origins, that of the individual, understand as a distinctive
array of signs which can never exhaust that to which it
refers. That is how we take ourselves, as self-representing
individuals; and that is how we treat and devise institutions
so as to address others, placing faith in the inexhaustibility of
even the most apparently “conformist,” resentful or
thoughtless individual, conferring upon them a sacrality
which in turn increases the likelihood that they will
demonstrate further signs of it. Our defense of any
articulation of hallowed sites ultimately leads us to re-trace
the process of minimization through which the Christian and
Jewish revelations could be resituated on terms both
irreducible to those revelations and capable of preparing us
for new ones; conversely, even the most far flung or, for that
matter, deliberately blasphemous or “pagan” sites of
resistant self-fashioning could be shown to be unintelligible
without the groundwork laid by those prior transformative
revelations.
This secular sacrality ensures that we can transcend any
possible disjunction between the sacred and the esthetic,
and render unnecessary any narrative that would see the
latter as coming to displace the former. If the public rituals

affirming national faith and the valorization of open-ended
exchange between producers and consumers are
consecrations of liberty, then liberal democracy and all its
attachments—free inquiry in the university, free association
in the streets and on-line, freedom for a diversity of faiths,
and so on—are all stances one converts to, every bit as
much as one converts to Roman Catholicism or Islam. The
response to anti-Western, anti-semitic victimary movements
would then be what I would call “evangelicism,” which
involves affirming and entering the global market in faiths
and acting as a screen for the frustrated desire of the Other,
demonstrating in one’s own person the internality of the
obstacles to that desire, and presenting poles of mimetic
attraction upon scenes representing its transcendence.
Meanwhile, insofar as the sacrality we honor no longer
depends upon its being protected from “secularizing”
influences, it no longer needs to be distanced from the
esthetic, which can in turn be seen as essential to the
conversion strategies of evangelicism. The complement of
conversion is simply “seduction,” which offers up access to
an object, predicated upon the desiring subject’s
demonstrating mastery of the proper rules of deferral; an
object, moreover, like all objects of desire, which undergoes
transformation in its being pursued and coming into
possession. Insofar as the transformation results from the
contribution made by this very interaction to the desired

object, the object is thereby enhanced rather than
subtracted from—the object, in fact, turns out to be one’s
own conversion, one’s occupation of the admired place and
one’s consequent realization and willing acceptance that
rather than providing closer access to the center, the object
“possessed” intensifies one’s responsibility to demonstrate
that such access is illusory and must remain so. In such a
space, the last can be first and the first last. The new forms
of deferral we need today involve setting in motion and
taking responsibility for new chains of events which are
nevertheless pointedly dependent for their completion upon
those fellow sign-users who would have (and perhaps did)
initially resist them.
Let’s return to the chiastic model I presented earlier. If what
initiates any act of semiosis is the experience of the danger
of mimetic rivalry, which is to say, an increase of doubt
proportionate to faith in the efficacy of the sign in
representing the object to all, or a diminishment of the
object’s immateriality and proportionate increase in the
scramble for material objects seeming to possess its force,
the goal of that act of semiosis must be twofold. First, it
must aim to restore the object’s immateriality, which is to say
to make whatever specific, material object for which we are
contending into a sign of the repulsive power of the center.
Second, it must aim to create the object, in its materiality,
anew—to provide for the production of more such objects, or

to make the object divisible or sharable in some hitherto
unimagined way. This new accessibility of the material object
emerges along with the renewal of faith in immateriality of
the sign, the immateriality of the sign as a rule regulating
such access. Finally, though, this means that the new
immateriality of the object, its renewal as a conduit of the
intelligence of the center, resides in a new materiality of the
sign, a new form of distinction, embodiment, enactment—a
new style and norm which invites participation and an
improvised iteration; a style and norm that draws attention to
its own constitution as a dictation taken from the intelligence
of the center.
Notes
1. I would like to thank Andrew Bartlett for pointing out the
relevance of this passage from Signs of Paradox to my
discussion. (back)
Works Cited
Gans, Eric. Signs of Paradox: Irony, Resentment and Other
Mimetic Structures. Stanford: U P, 1997.
⸻-. “Return of the Sacred, I: The Sacred and the
Significant.” Chronicles of Love and Resentment no. 326.
dec. 17, 2005. Available <http:
anthropoetics.ucla.edu/views/vw326.htm>.

