

Event, Origin, Center
Let’s start with “journalism.” You watch a cable or news
show, or read (probably online) an article in a newspaper,
and there’s a “story” there. Maybe a story buried under
layers of implicit and explicit editorializing, but, still, a story:
one thing is purported to have happened, then another, and
so on. Where do the stories come from—how does the
journalist know where to look for them and find them? In
every case, they are framed as stories with reference to the
governing apparatus—the state. The state “does” something
—the president issues an order, Congress passes a law, the
court makes a decision—and that’s the story, occasionally
presented straight (many stories are pretty much
stenography), more often framed in terms of the event’s
correspondence with some set of expectations, or on a
continuum of “licitness.” If the story concerns a corporation
or another institution—a sports team, a movie studio, a
university—that institution is treated either as an adjunct of
the state (the story regards compliance or non-compliance,
or the serving of what is ultimately a state function) or as
state-like itself (as issuing its own executive orders, making
policy changes, as its charter and state law authorizes it to
do).
This raises the question of how the news media ever
becomes something other than a stenographer,

broadcasting the actions and decisions of government and
its auxiliaries. It is the licitness spectrum that makes this
possible: a government organ, or political party (or
corporate, or...) decision or action might be illegal, or
improperly arrived at or carried out, or can lead to
consequences unanticipated by the initial act or decision. In
other words, what is of interest is some kind of discrepancy.
But how are such discrepancies detected? To say that a
particular decision or act is “illegal” is to say that one organ
of government might or should come into conflict with
another organ of government (we can make the necessary
adjustments in talking about other institutions, for which
“illegality” means a conflict between an institution
authorized by the government and the government); to say
that an act or decision has been improperly carried out is,
similarly, to point to possible conflicts, perhaps within the
same organ of government (between superiors and
subordinates, perhaps); and to say that an act or decision
was a mistake or disaster is also to indicate and incite certain
kinds of later, ultimately official assessments of and
reactions to those decisions.
But how does an actor within the news media know and
come to report that an act or decision of government (or...) is
illegal, improper or incorrect? Only by having access to
actors within, but to at least some extent at odds with, the
governing decision maker, is this possible. This might be a

“whistleblower,” or a power seeking or resentful individual or
faction (assuming there’s any point to distinguishing
between this and the whistleblower), but this is the only way
the reporter can determine the legality, propriety or
correctness of an act (that is, locate it on the licitness
spectrum). The news media really come into its own, then,
by leveraging disloyalty and dysfunction within or between
institutions that are supposed to cohere and support each
other. There may, of course, be dysfunction in any institution,
but the news media is only possible insofar as responsibility
for identifying and remedying dysfunction is assigned to
institutional agencies other than those making the final
decision within those institutions—that is, within the terms of
“rule of law” or “checks and balances.” Within a mostly
functional institution with isolated dysfunction, the purpose
of identifying dysfunction would be to report it to the
governing authority to remedy the dysfunction—but this
wouldn’t generate “news.” The news media can only thrive
by inflating and exploiting dysfunction and encouraging
conflict and disloyalty within institutions. Even in a case
where the news media acts as a “praetorian guard” for a
particular administration, that just means that the state
factions whose influence they amplify are behind that
administration as well.
This further means, though, that the news media are still
stenographers, only of specific factions within institutions.

We can attribute enormous power to media organizations
because we see them destroy (and effectively protect) very
powerful people (like presidents) and advance and sabotage
policy measures into which substantial resources have been
invested on a regular basis. But most of this power should be
attributed to those factions distributed within the institutions
themselves, who themselves have plenty of reasons for
wanting to destroy and sabotage office holders and policies.
At most, members of the news media can marginally
advance the interests of one faction against another. If we
bring in another seemingly very powerful institution, the
university, the analysis changes very little. Along with
supplying personnel for staffing the governing and auxiliary
institutions (including the empire of think tanks, situated at
the center of a Venn diagram connecting universities, media
and government), the universities—obviously massively
funded by the government—provide the information useful
for one faction or another—a new “study” shows defense
spending, or public health policy, or labor policy, needs to be
directed one way or another. Needless to say, it is always
possible for a bureaucratic faction to select and promote one
study over others.
In a sense, the analysis is still not significantly different if we
bring in what seem to be the most powerful global forces,
the giant corporations operating according to the logic of
financialized capital. Capital and international banks can

cripple most countries; they fund the aforementioned think
tanks and the political parties that produce the candidates
that authorize the grants of power to the bureaucrats. But
capital must still operate through the state, which is why it
spends all that money on political influence and intellectual
weaponry. Certainly, banks and the larger conglomerates
could bring even a medium sized state to its knees, but they
couldn’t do that to the largest states and certainly not a
coalition of states organized under a hegemon. At this point,
probably all that appears to us as politics is precisely capital
using states and states using capital, each leveraging the
power of its counterpart to increase its own power vis a vis
its rivals in its own field—all of which, again, has to pass
through the state bureaucracy and its competing factions
because capital cannot imagine operating outside of law,
official currency, and the policing power of the state.
None of this, of course, says anything about the quality of
any of these acts or decisions—one study can be better than
another (although what that means cannot be determined
outside of an institutional power analysis aligned with the
one conducted here), one policy might approximate its
intended ends more closely than another (ditto), and some
ends are more worth attaining than others. There’s no need
to claim that every government is thoroughly saturated with
depravity—the analysis I’m making here seems to suggest
that only insofar as one accepts the official promotional

materials of these institutions, which all claim to operate very
differently than described here. Indeed, the most dissident
groups of both left and right invariably end up relying on
some more marginal government factions, allied with more
marginal media outlets, pointing to more obscure
discrepancies, themselves; or, they work with official
sources and decode, but almost always by deriving the
decoding formula from some idealized version of the official
purpose of the institution (exposing that the government
really represents some narrow interest rather than the
people). This of course means that all of us, at whatever
distance, are doing nothing more than seeking out
discrepancies at the center that we hope will empower the
faction that would institute a form of sovereignty we would
more enthusiastically enlist for. It takes a dramatic re-
orientation in one’s way of thinking to adopt the kind of
institutional-power relationship outlined above without losing
your ability to make moral distinctions—a re-orientation
which the notion of the “red pill” describes as well as any
readily imaginable alternative.
My purpose in conducting this little analysis here is to bring
into focus an observation and, then, a question: first, the
very operation of all the institutions of information
production and provision presupposes an unwavering
orientation toward the central authority, regardless of how
decentralized things seem, or how impossible we might think

it is to locate the sources of power and decision making
within the circuits of electronic media; in which case, the
question becomes, why is the central authority so riven with
conflicting factions and the consequent dysfunction? If we
can answer that question, and derive from that answer a
“problem” that might be “solved,” we would also be able to
place order in all the eyes and ears of the central authority,
which are presently mostly occupied with informing on,
misdirecting, and lying about each other. And the question
has a very simple answer: the central authority is so
disordered because its occupant is constantly changing and
so all its organs must themselves be occupied with jockeying
for power so as to secure their own positions in anticipation
of the next shift or upheaval. And this means significant
factions must always be opposed to any consolidation of
power at the center that would make transitions of power
less disruptive—or, we might say, less suggestive of new
opportunities.
So, a new question: how did the occupation of central
authority become programmatically insecure? But let’s step
back a bit: why is there someone at the center in the first
place? In starting this essay with an account of the news
media, I also wanted to foreground the irreducibility of the
event. Why are there “events”? Why do things happen, at
least in such a way as to be significant and memorable, to
leave a mark? There are events because there are centers,

and centers because there are events, and even the most
abstract statistical account of, say, the development of labor
markets over the last century can only create new time
frames and new, more distanced or focused, sites of
observation regarding those events, which never cease to
refer to some center. Even the ever more complete wiring of
all institutions through the algorithmic governance of
planetary scale computation hasn’t changed the fact that
actual computing outcomes always come out as “hacked” in
the interests of one faction or another—in fact, at this point,
the Stack has simply created a new field for the central
authorities (in their global competitions and hierarchies) and
their adjutant institutions to play exactly the same game
they’ve been playing all along.
It’s impossible to report something without giving it an event
structure—that is, a basic beginning-middle-end narrative
structure. It’s also impossible to report something without
conferring significance upon it. Many people insist that they
want just the facts, without narrative or framing, but since
there are an infinite number of “facts” in the world and any
publication is finite, choosing to report some and not all the
rest is already a framing—again, this set of facts, or, really,
events, are significant—and significant in relation to each
other, comprising a version of reality. Finding yourself
compelled to repeat epithets like “without evidence” is just a
sign that this more fundamental, a priori framing, is no longer

getting the job done. So, we break the world down into
significant events that can, at least in principle, be
articulated in a coherent way (claims of the “chaos” or
“meaninglessness” of modern life are really just different
ways of conferring significance and articulating), and both
participating and reporting on any event situates us in
relation to or, to put it more strongly, places us in the orbit of
some central authority which guarantees the meaning of all
social happenings. Even acts carried out by the figure
occupying the center (monarch, president, prime minister),
even one with the most absolute or emergency powers, are
“peripheral” or off center insofar as they refer back to the
authority vested in that figure prior to and enabling this
particular act.
So, all of humanity is made up of peripheral events. Why
should this be the case? I would work with what I take to be a
strong definition of “event”: something that happens and
that can’t be reduced to, or wouldn’t have been predictable
by, its “parts” or prior events. An event is something new.
This definition is seemingly easy to contest—after all, don’t
people predict things correctly, and can’t we break down an
event into its parts and recompose it as their sum? You can
single out a specific framing of an event, or view it under one
of its (publicly agreed upon) “aspects,” and in that case
predict it accurately. Obvious cases are sporting events and
elections, with clear numbers (if everything goes right)

indicating an unmistakable winner. But that’s an arbitrarily
restricted representation of the event—an event, moreover,
constructed precisely so as to produce a certain outcome in
that “aspect.” Lots of people and things need to be in place
and to play specific roles under conditions that can never be
perfectly specified in order for the event to be given closure
—that is, so we could say, this game or election is over. In
that case, ensuring all those people will be in place is part of
the event; and if, in some sense, the event has been
completed, the claim that that, in fact, constituted the event
can be contested—what we take to be the end (the winner
declared when the clock runs out or the votes all counted) is
at the same time a beginning and middle of some other
event. The very fact that we can and do impose closure on
events means that events are constituted by humanly
imposed closure, even if not always with the same degree of
explicitness and formality. The problem with reducing an
event to the sum of its parts is similar—you can only do it
retrospectively, with the event in its humanly imposed
closure in mind. Otherwise, you would have no way of
knowing what counts as a “part.” “Analyzing” the event is
just another way of imposing closure upon it—you have to
take as given what you purport to produce.
To   h a v e   e v e n t s ,   t o   p a r t i c i p a t e   i n   e v e n t s ,   i s   t o   b e   h u m a n .   Ye s ,
nothing in nature happens exactly the same way two times.
But nothing happens in nature, either. For whom would

things happen, other than people? There’s no escaping
anthropocentrism—those most intent on denouncing and
transcending anthropocentrism have coined the term
“A n t h r o p o c e n e ”   fo r   t h e   c u r r e n t   p e r i o d   i n   e a r t h   h i s t o r y,   w h i c h
suggests that we need to transcend anthropocentrism
because it has drawn the entire earth and its environment
into its deathly vortex. It’s hard to get more anthropocentric
than that. We can keep making the boundaries separating
the human from the animal and inorganic, on the one side,
and the technological, on the other side, and it is in fact very
intellectually productive to do so, but this will always involve
re-constituting the irreducibility of the human as constitutive
of those boundaries. So, we come back to the question: why
is the human constituted through the event?
The simplest answer is that the human emerged in an event.
This seems theological, and so virtually all “serious” thinkers
flee from it, but until the threshold of the human can be
shown or even imagined to have been crossed in some so
gradual as to be imperceptible way that no actual instant of
crossing can be identified, the human as emergent in an
event is the better hypothesis. Which brings us to language,
undisputedly constitutive of the human, which likewise can
only be imagined having emerged in an event. What would
“part” of a “meaningful” sign be? How would it not already
be meaningful? In any gradual emergence of the sign as
meaningful, how could there not be a threshold under which

it has no meaning and above which it does? To keep things
simple and avoid going into debt to debates within
disciplines like semantics, semiotics and linguistics, I’ll say
that by “meaning” I simply mean that a sign can be deemed
to be the same in different occasions of its utterance or
issue. This is only possible given some “agreement”
stipulating the transferability of the sign but, of course, as
Rousseau already pointed out, there seems to be no way of
imagining arriving at such an agreement other than through
the use of language itself. But there is a way.
The best way of hypothesizing the origin of language (and
the human) has turned out to be through considering the
logic of imitation. This is paradoxical, because imitation
effaces originality and any origin—if we say there is an
original, and then someone imitates it, we’re not thinking
imitation in an originary way; but if there’s nothing but
imitation, there is no origin. It is, in fact, the end to which
imitation brings us that enables us to think imitation as
origin. If all is imitation, then we learn to desire by imitating
another’s desire—for that matter, we also learn to desire by
imitating another’s imitation of what he takes to be my desire
—which creates “scarcity” as we must converge on the same
object. The telos of imitation is rivalry, crisis and violence—
violence without end or reconciliation. There are very good
reasons for us to be very uneasy in talking about imitation,
and denying it whenever we can—the more we acknowledge

imitation as the foundation of our being, the more we are
bereft of will, freedom and any claim to self-mastery. The
historical solution to the crisis of imitation has been the
construction of socially shared models, or what Rene Girard
called “external mediation.” But for external mediation to
work, we need to place the model beyond rivalry, which
blocks thinking about imitation in an originary direction. It’s
only when external forms of mediation collapses that we can
think imitation in originary terms, which at first merely
radicalizes the crisis.
Still, we must have come out of our mimetic crises somehow
—after all, we’re still here. Mimetic crisis represents the
destruction of community—but that also means that the key
to community must be found in the same neighborhood, so
to speak. Mimetic crisis involves everyone in the group
converging on the same object; so, articulating some non-
violent, differently mimetic (still assuming nothing outside of
the mimetic) relation to the center must be what gets us
from the end of imitation to the beginning of community. It’s
remarkable that, given that humans must have been aware of
the prevalence and even dangers of imitation from very early
on, and it already figures prominently in Aristotle, no one,
until very recently, has thought imitation through to its
deadly conclusions. The reason must lie in the collapse of
external mediation, which set a cap on mimetic inquiry.
External mediation collapsed because the external mediators

themselves—kings, nobles, priests—became objects of
violence. Something that no longer works becomes an
object of inquiry; in this case, the way in which it ceased to
work made the inquiry inescapable, and provided it with its
problematic. Something about violence toward an object of
mediation must lie at the conversion of mimesis from
community destroying to community creating.
Right now, we really have two ways of thinking about the
conversion of the mimetic crisis into an origin. Fortunately,
they are both very good ways, even if one is, on the crucial
point, better than the other. For Rene Girard, a mediator is
selected at the height of the mimetic crisis and
“externalized,” which is to say, lynched. Someone in the
group, for some arbitrary reason, is differentiated from the
rest, so that the incipient melee can be directed toward this
single member. As the group converges on him, he becomes
the cause of the violence—he has divided the community,
and the community can now only be united against him. This
provides us with the very enduring structure of the
scapegoat. But once the mediator has been made “external,”
he also becomes the cause of the unity, indeed origin, of the
community. He is simultaneously villain and savior—in this
duality, Girard locates the origin of mythology. And the
duplicity of mythology, since the responsibility of the
community for the murder of the savior must be disavowed.
Ta ke   t h e   m y t h   o f   P r o m e t h e u s ,   w h o   s a v e d   a n d   o r i g i n a t e d

humanity by providing it with tools, knowledge and fire, and
was punished severely for it—not by “us,” of course—
responsibility is fobbed off onto Zeus. But, on Girard’s
analysis, it was us. Prometheus’s human model violated, very
likely in some innovation, the sacred order of the community,
and his gifts can only be received and enjoyed insofar as the
lynching he suffered as a result can be denied, and thereby
ritually retrieved.
This account would already let us see why there must be a
center, and why the center can’t quite be “human,” even
when it is occupied by one. If someone sees his fellow desire
something, or even imagines he desires that things, his own
desire will be aroused. Right away, the two are arranged
around that object, which situates the object at the center. It
remains that the center because the mimetic rivalry, and
eventually mimetic crisis, will enhance the desirability of the
central object. In Girard’s model, we must imagine a
diversion from the desired object toward a single member of
the group who displaces it as the center, which is to say, the
increasingly intense focus of everyone’s attention. This
central figure must also provide the resolution of the crisis,
which is to say the power to found and maintain the
community must be conferred upon him after the fact. Thus,
the center is a—indeed the first—source of agency within the
now human community, and no future agency will be
possible without it. This is why center and event are bound

inextricably together. As we will see shortly, we can also
think the originary scene, more consistently, in my view, by
assuming that the focus remains on the initial object of
desire, in which case it is the shared consumption, and then
unanimously acknowledged locus of absence, of the initial
object of desire, that makes the center the foundation of the
community.
Before I proceed, I’d like to ask a question: where are we
here? Within what discipline? It’s definitely not philosophy;
indeed, my sense of the incommensurability of mimetic
theory and philosophy has been radicalized—and this
includes anti- and post-metaphysical philosophy, some of
which does border on some of these questions. Philosophy
remains the province of “man thinking,” and its content and
concerns are how man thinking comes and continues to be
man thinking. There’s no “man” in mimetic theory—there are
oscillations between sameness and difference in the shapes
given to common life. It’s a “human science,” for sure, but it’s
hard to see how it can enter the actually existing human
sciences without essentially razing them to ground and
making it all one big human science. The other human
sciences start with “social facts,” which is to say actions,
behaviors and institutions authorized and recognized
formally by the community. That’s where I started this essay
as well—with “journalism” as a coherent body of social facts.
But there’s no way of asking, within any of these disciplines,

why are there social facts in the first place? That’s because
they ultimately derive from philosophy, and similarly
foundationally distinguish themselves from collective
revelation. My purpose in opening as I did was to show that
an honest and thoroughgoing inquiry into “social facts” leads
one to their irreducibly revelatory nature, which is to say their
origin in some event, which in turn leads us to the origin of
humanity in revelation, which in turn led us to mimesis.
Girard called his thinking “fundamental anthropology”; Eric
Gans, to whom I will now turn, calls it “generative
anthropology” and “originary thinking”; I have called it
“anthropomorphics.” Does it need a single name?
Regardless, it is an imperious, intellectually ravenous, and
therefore “imperialist” mode of thought. It takes its
incommensurability with all hitherto existing thought as a
challenge.
Here’s the limit of Girard’s hypothesis: there’s no reason why
some animal group, even an exceptionally intelligent one,
should view ganging up on and killing one of its members as
“meaningful,” which is to say, “memorable.” Animals kill their
own kind without it changing their behavior or form of
organization in the slightest. There needs to be some formal
acknowledgment of the event—there needs to be a sign. The
origin of language needs to be conjoined with the origin of
the human. And, since what is to be formally acknowledged
is the revelation of the group as a community sharing a

center, the origin of language and the origin of the human is
also the origin of the sacred. So, Gans first proposed adding
a sign to the conclusion of Girard’s otherwise unaltered
scene—after the originary murder, the group all gestures to
the body of the victim in some way. But he then realized that
if the real point is the pointing, the killing itself is superfluous
—the group could have just as readily gestured toward a
living, not-yet (and therefore maybe not to be) victim. We
can add that the issuance of a gesture after the crisis has
already been resolved is less likely than a sign when the
crisis is at its height, and therefore most urgently needs to
be abated—that would make it effective and memorable.
If it’s more likely that violence was averted before, rather
than commemorated after, the fact, then there’s also no
need to assume a human victim at the center. Gans slices
away with Okham’s Razor. We just need a desirable object,
which becomes more desirable as each member imitates the
desire of the other for it. A single, arbitrarily selected human
would not have been a desirable object for other humans—it
is possible to imagine a group of males grouped around a
female, and perhaps some matriarchal ritual orders
reference some such event, but for our originary scene it’s
hard to see what would bring a group of men to be clustered
around a single woman, since sexual intercourse is an
intrinsically one-on-one activity. What is much easier to
imagine is clustering around some food item, which would be

a regular occurrence for the group. (Gans also pointed out
that the earliest communities worshipped animals and
plants, with human divinity and human sacrifice coming
much later, with hierarchical orders.) So, normally, feeding
would proceed in accord with the pecking order—the alpha
animal eats to satiation, then the beta, and so on. On our
hypothetical occasion, the intensification of mimetic desire
overrides the pecking order as all rush to the meal at the
center. There’s no way of sharing it in an orderly manner,
because the only existing order has just collapsed. One
member of the group hesitates in the face of this emergent
disorder—his reaching for the central object is aborted; this
action that has not been completed becomes a sign, and can
be imitated. It is a sign of deferral, and allows everyone to
formally acknowledge a new order, enabling them to
proceed to an orderly, shared consumption of the central
object.
Gans and others, very much including myself, have
reiterated this originary hypothesis many, many times, and
so I try to do it differently on each occasion, so as to make it
an object of thought and productive of discourse. An
approach I suggested very early on, but have not really stuck
with, and so I’ll retrieve it here, is as follows: in working with
the originary hypothesis, one should violate the minimality of
the scene by adding one element that “tilts” the scene in one
direction or another—a clinamen, one could say. The

originary event could then be conceptualized as a bundle of
still unfolding possibilities—it can be virtualized, as we
participate in the deferral occurring there. So, for example,
from where in the group would the first sign have issued
from? Would it have been the alpha? The beta? Some more
marginal, potentially victimized member? We don’t need to
answer this question for the originary hypothesis to be
“validated”—it is one of many questions that could be left
open. But someone would have had to gone first (and how
“aware” do we have to imagine this individual being
regarding what he’s doing?), and it would have to be
someone bearing some traces of the pre-human group. So,
we could play with secondary hypotheses in accounting for
human differentiation. In hypothesizing the scene we are
doing something very tricky and tentative, because we must
use the language we have as a result of the scene to
articulate a scene where only a very preliminary and to us
alien (and yet still full-fledged, insofar as it is a sign) form of
that language was just emerging. They knew what they were
doing and they didn’t know what they were doing, because
“knowing what they were doing” is not yet fully “applicable.”
They know enough to re-enact, but without any way of
representing what they are re-enacting. This boundary
between the tacit and explicit, is a permanent feature of
language, a source of linguistic development and
manipulation, and therefore of secondary hypotheses. We
are never not on some scene, and we can never fully

articulate the way we are on that scene. At the same time,
we can keep trying to imagine “causes” and “motivations”
that would have lead the first to hesitate and others to
imitate him and thereby generate secondary hypotheses but
without ever getting “inside” the scene sufficiently to cancel
its revelatory nature as an event.
The origin of language, representation as the deferral of
violence, the human as that species that poses a greater
danger to itself than is presented to it by anything external:
originary thinking proposes a particular understanding of
agency. How do we “decide what to do”? It’s possible to
generate answers to this question by rummaging through
the inventory of “internal” “faculties”—“will,” “reason,”
“calculation,” and so on. Or, to ground the decision maker
deterministically in a series of “structures” and “causes,” of
which there will never be any lack. For originary thinking,
agency is deferral. I’ll explain this in terms that may sound
philosophical, but I’ll really be drawing upon words that exist
in every language and the meaning of which is intuitively
self-evident. The animal pecking order, like any order,
implies differentiation, or some relation between same and
other. Imitation, as it intensifies, collapses difference: we all
become the same. But we can never be same enough—we
can’t occupy the exact same space, we can’t hold exactly
the same object, we can put the exact same piece of food in
our mouths. At the point where sameness reaches its limits,

the non-being of other in this place is the only way of
introducing difference—the non-being, the removal, of the
other, would restore the other to otherness. Deferral
introduces a difference, an other, before this “final solution”
becomes the only possibility, while also implying it as a
possibility. The first one who hesitates, who converts grasp
into gesture, becomes other, and an other who need not be
attacked because he can be imitated while preserving
difference. If the first one to issue what will have become the
sign once others imitate him is, in fact, imitated, then the
central object, which is let be for the moment, becomes
other, and everyone becomes other to each other through it.
To   a c t ,   t o   d o   s o m e t h i n g ,   i s ,   t h e n ,   t o   p r o d u c e   o r   p r e s e n t
some other that defers the crisis of sameness. We would be
satisfied with nothing less than an impossible degree of
sameness without the imposition of this other. This means
creating a center, in relation to which one is here and the
other is there. This doesn’t mean we “decide” to put
something at the center, and that we need to get inside
some decision making process and construct a set of
cognitive steps, or some wheels turning, that leads from the
proposition “we are getting too close to absolute sameness”
to the proposition “we can agree on this thing as our center.”
It is, rather, the center that calls us, and that we hear and
heed. On the originary scene, the first to gesture does not
exactly know what he is doing—he is merely registering the

impasse, the double bind, of mimesis. His sign is a result of
compulsion, and those who imitate him submit to the same
compulsion, a compulsion that can only be seen to come
from the center. As Gans has put it, the first sign is the
Name-of-God, and the center is sacred. The center is other,
and in being the same in relation to it we are other to each
other. The problem of “what to do” is to listen to the center.
So, what does that mean? How do we tell whether we or
another are listening more or less closely to the center? We
are always already listening to the center, insofar as there is
no social order or even social setting, without some center
towards which we are arrayed—an altar and its rituals, a
government with its central position (monarch, prime
minister, president), a room with a table around which all sit
and norms of politeness or civility governing exchanges, a
canonical text which we are devoted to interpreting, a
centrally imposed currency governing economic exchanges,
and so on—we are never starting from scratch here. We
can’t say a word to each other without referring, implicitly
and explicitly, to previous conversations and events, and
governing our interactions in accord with some norm drawn
from them. Our fundamental “motivation” is always to
preserve that center and prevent what is intuited as a
complete breakdown in presence. This seems to suggest
that we will tend to conform as closely as possible to modes
of action that have previously “worked” in situations “like”

this one. And, statistically speaking, that is overwhelmingly
what the center is telling us to do. But sometimes it is trying
to approximate more and more closely expected,
predictable, pre-approved actions that will accelerate the
crisis of sameness. We listen to the center and thereby act
insofar as this is the case, and to some extent it is always the
case. If approximating standardized and stereotyped
responses aggravates the crisis of sameness, the center
needs to be restored, and this means one has to “read the
room,” and reading the room means imagining a new
configuration that would make us other to each other again.
Yo u   a re ,  o f   c o u rs e ,  i n   t h e   ro o m   yo u   a re   re a d i n g ,  a n d   s o
reading the room involves getting a read on others reading of
you, especially if you are ahead of the game in determining
the crisis, in which case your moves in “sensing” and eliciting
signs of the crisis provide you with your reading material as
others take in your movements. Listening to the center
entails reorganizing the field on which you all move by
following the way others follow you as you defer the onset of
terminal sameness or, we could say, entropy.
History, then, is the history of the center, and, in fact, we
have something we can call “history” because it is possible
for a human being to occupy the center. A human will occupy
the center when, in listening to it, hears that the imminent
danger of the collapse of presence cannot be deferred
through recourse to the established ritual order. There is

always something “revolutionary” about a human seizing the
center, even in mundane contexts like a friend stepping in a
resolving a dispute between a couple of other friends. At the
same time, someone moving decisively to the center is
always a possibility, since a feeling for the imminence of
some crisis of sameness is unevenly distributed—it is
sometimes possible to feel the rumblings of such a crisis
years, decades, maybe centuries in advance. A human at the
center places himself in the position of a potential victim as a
condition of being a successful restorer of same and other:
there is a firm place for Girard’s scapegoat mechanism here.
If those two friends resume and embitter their dispute, they
will likely blame the well meaning mediator (was he, really,
well meaning?). How we manage our relations with—listen to
—the humans we put at the center is the heart of all our
morality, ethics and politics.
We have all had the experience of being angry toward
someone while simultaneously realizing that there is some
“disproportion” between our anger and the actions and
intents we attribute to the target of our anger. I feel confident
in saying that we have all had this experience, if not in real
time than in retrospect because, in fact, there is never any
commensurability between our attitudes towards those at
the center and actions attributed to the person at the center.
An accordance between the two is created in terms of the
needs of the scene. If there is no natural, neutral, self-

evident, automatic relation between our engagement with
the person at the center and the “deserts” of that person, we
can ask, what, then, is the right or best way of engaging the
occupant of the center—in the simplest sense of the person
we’re all looking at, talking about, doing something to,
paying attention to, obeying—even if the “all” is just “all of
me” as I assemble myself around that center against the
background of an imagined audience and possible
participants. Consider that moment where you notice some
discrepancy between your anger toward someone and
whatever you can identify as having elicited that anger. You
have a choice here; or, the center is issuing conflicting, or
ambiguous, directives, which can only be narrowed down by
following some that lead you back to the crisis of sameness,
leaving you with the one that leads out. You can double
down on your anger by attributing this very discrepancy to
the other, treating it as a marker of the other’s duplicity, of
the other being even worse than you imagined. You thereby
summon whatever norms, rules, traditions, customs might
be at hand and find as many violations of those norms, rules,
traditions and customs as you can to “justify” your rage. In
doing so, if you are still inclined to look at yourself, or allow
others to point out what you are doing, you will see you are
collapsing the scene by mixing and matching imperatives
snatched from their respective contexts so as to “make your
case,” a case that would not hold up even under slightly
altered circumstances. You can feel that you are protecting

the center here by eliminating this usurper of the center, who
has abused the privilege of being placed at the center.
We can see that in this scenario the other is kept at the
center and the “agent” displaces his own centeredness,
claiming to act only in the name of another center
constructed conveniently so as to match just this occasion.
The agent is deploying power, insofar as he puts to work his
individual capacities along with his ability to compel and
persuade others to make the center an attractor of violence,
but he is displacing responsibility. To be responsible is to
place oneself at the center, even if only of a limited scene,
and to remain in that center after the event has concluded—
to “answer for it.” So, you treat the other who has become
the center of a scene you participate in constructing while
and by standing at the center of the scene that will be
established in the aftermath. The center of that scene
should be demonstratively the same on the new scene on
which you stand as center and represent it, and you should
yourself be the same on this scene as on the previous one:
this is what “accountability” means. What it means for both
figures to be the same in both cases cannot be specified in
advanced, nor can a general rule be constructed: this will
always be a discursive construct. The responsible actor will
have recourse to the same traditions as the irresponsible
one, and the difference will be that the former will draw
attention to the relation between traditions referenced and

action taken making that relation as singular as possible so
as to exhaust the scene: this rule was applied to this action
in this way because this application maximized the
consistency of the history of applications of this rule while
simultaneously revealing in the event all that the rule enabled
us to see as relevant. The irresponsible actor, meanwhile, will
try to prevent his auditors from arriving at any specific
connections between traditions evoked and actions taken,
and will play a kind of shell game as one tries to figure out
what justified some “this” in particular. Again, the difference
between the two will not always be obvious, but we can sum
up this difference in the form of a familiar and even
popularizable formula: power should always be matched with
responsibility. It is immoral to give someone responsibility for
doing something without giving them the power to do it; it is
immoral to give someone power, or to exercise power, that is
not embedded in responsibility; it is immoral, for that matter,
to claim responsibility for that over which you have no power,
or to attribute responsibility to others for that over which
they exercise no power. Talking about mismatches, and
increased correspondences, between power and
responsibility will always provide for more coherent
assessments and conversations than arguing about
intrinsically unlimited and undefinable concepts like rights,
equality, freedom and even, for that matter, “justice,” which
can really never be anything more than the coincidence of
power and responsibility in the one delegated to settle the

dispute.
It’s very hard to imagine everyone, in any setting, having
exactly equal power and therefore exactly equal
responsibility—it’s even harder to imagine, albeit a bit easier
than it once was, to imagine what it would look like to insist
that this be the case. You would have to wreak havoc on all
institutions and enterprises which, without exception, insofar
as they last for more than five minutes, establish formal and
informal hierarchies. Asking the question of how to make
power match responsibility, then, is not an intellectual
exercise to be carried out with the assumption of a year zero
—it is always an assessment and participation in existing
orders. It’s sometimes possible to pick up power that has
been left on the ground, so to speak, or to take responsibility
for some breach and then seek to gather the power needed
to make good on that responsibility; it’s also possible to take
responsibility for conferring power on a flawed leader who
might in turn channel power back; and, of course,
sometimes it’s possible to just do what one is supposed to.
All this still leaves open the question of what all these
institutions and enterprises should be doing, or, for that
matter, which should exist, and which shouldn’t. Part of the
power of the power/responsibility nexus is that it provides at
least a negative answer: any mode of activity that does not
allow for the commensuration of power and responsibility is
indefensible, and will probably be so on other,

commonsensical grounds. But we can retrieve a hoary old
slogan from an unlikely source in order to approximate the
substance of a good human order while remaining at the
right level of generality (that is, without specifying the
obligatory form of sacrality, form of government, and so on):
from each according to his abilities, to each according to his
needs.
This slogan was made famous by Marx’s Critique of the
Gotha Program, so it is easy to attribute to it an ultra-
egalitarian, oikophobic altruistic meaning. If looked at
closely, though, it must be the most inegalitarian, dare I say
it, “based,” political maxim imaginable—which is not
surprising, given that comes at the end of a relentless
critique, on Marx’s part, of the concept of “equal rights.” One
might think that the point is to divide those with “needs” and
those with “abilities” into separate constituencies, with the
latter eschewing any privileges and selflessly serving the
former. But that can’t be right: everyone has both needs and
abilities. And the ablest, in fact, have needs far beyond those
of the less able—discovering, honing, training, refining and
exercising one’s abilities at the highest possible level is itself
a need, one requiring the deployment of substantial social
resources. Meanwhile, it’s very good to keep in mind that
along with perhaps more modest needs, the less able also
have abilities, and we don’t know what they are without
institutional design aimed at eliciting them. So, we now have

a question to bring to bear on every social institution,
whether industrial, educational, artistic, scientific, or
anything else—is it maximizing the meeting of needs and the
exercise of abilities, both in itself and in its contribution to
the entire order.
So, the demand we can make on the occupant of the social
center is that power and responsibility be matched in that
person, who really just stands at the apex of gradations of
power/responsibility articulations, all of which refer back to
that center. And what that person is responsible for is
overseeing the practices whereby the discovery and
exercise of abilities is the cause and effect of the meeting of
needs. What is involved in making such a “demand,” though,
is maximizing one’s own abilities so as to take the
responsibility that will deserve the receipt of power needed
to complement the central power in one of its extensions.
Note that what is excluded here is any recourse to terms of
“legitimacy” that stand outside of the order of articulated
power and responsibility—the ruler cannot be charged with
not being chosen of God, nor of not respecting “rights,” or
representing the “will of the people,” or any of the other
shibboleths of the secular order that undergird liberalism,
understood here as the process of centralization through
equalization—intermediate layers of power and responsibility
are continually hacked away so that central power can be
exercised directly on all subjects. Liberalism guarantees only

perpetual conflict, because demands for equality can never
be met in a satisfactory way, the will of the people can never
be sufficiently approximated, rights can never be adequately
defined so as to be protected, and so on. All of these
political concepts are attempts to fill the gaps left by the
destruction of sacral kingship, which included a guarantee
that the person occupying the center today should be the
same one occupying it tomorrow. The sacral king served as
the mediator between the cosmos and the community, and
sacral kingship is probably the most common human
political order. In sacral kingship a human fully occupies the
center, attracting the devotion and resentments of the entire
community, and providing for a complete communal order.
The sacral king is also there as an object of sacrifice, and we
can no longer perform sacrifices because we can no longer
believe that the killing of a centrally located individual will
placate the gods. But we need both the unanimity regarding
the primacy of the center and the assurance of succession it
provides—whether or not such unanimity is actually attained
and succession ensured, those are the terms in accord with
which any good order must be judged. After all, if we did not
have such a need, what would account for all the intellectual
investment in developing theories of legitimation and
designing constitutions and governmental forms and
traditions intended to meet those terms of legitimacy—no
social order can bear an interim in which the transfer of
power is not laid out in steps that can produce consensus

that the seat of power remains the same—such steps will be
invented retroactively, if need be. But we can now have a
more pragmatic and sturdier guarantee, and one at least as
capable for inspiring loyalty and devotion: there must be
someone at the center, there already is someone at the
center, and we can all leverage our own “orbiting” centers so
as to make the social center continue and ever more closely
approach serving as the source of the articulation of power
and responsibility, needs and abilities.
There is obviously no clear path from the social order we live
in to the kind I’m describing. But we can start to see a path
by minimizing what seem like massive, insurmountable,
differences. Let’s grant that everything is now fake, which
would really mean that everyone is competing with everyone
else for the patronage of the center in fighting their
demonized enemy, with the center pocketing the demanded
tributes and going its own way. But there is still the center—it
is less possible than ever before to pursue a political project
without deploying the terms of the center to insist that
whoever occupies that seat should really be on your side
against your symmetrically opposite (and thereby easily
targeted) number. The fakeness—everyone matters,
everyone’s voice counts, everyone can be empowered,
everything is always at stake; nothing ever happens the way
anyone wants, even if no one quite realizes this—is the result
of the compulsive centralization through equalization

constitutive of liberalism, which derives from the shattering
of sacral imperial centers, and which now runs on auto-pilot,
or AI. But everyone implicitly concedes that nothing makes
sense without reference to the center, which, if you flesh out
the various critiques, pleadings, bombast, dialogues, and
fantasies, is always being invoked as the guarantee of one’s
stance (one could also construct the implicit scenario,
however unlikely, by which a chain of command from the
occupant of the center to circle protecting the speaker and
expelling his enemies would materialize).
Also, however fake, there are institutions in which are located
levers of power, even if in some cases just the power to shut
the institution down. You can want to do nothing, but you
really can’t—you’re circulating through some of these
institutions and you can always locate yourself somewhere
on the spectrum between parroting the narrative being
pumped into it and disabling that narrative. You can best
modulate your activities within these institutions by
developing the practice of an infiltrator. You’re an infiltrator
on behalf of the sovereign to come, gathering intelligence,
finding and recruiting co-infiltrators, leaving tracks for others
to follow, indicating a willingness to support any move
towards a “realer” form of governance. You must free
yourself of the reactiveness encouraged by the particular
mimetic intensifications of liberalism, which generate
ineffectual tit-for-tat exchanges. You might respond or

engage with opposite numbers, but without imagining it to
be a real exchange or dialogue—rather, you are modeling a
particular way of marking an institution. De-politicization
might be the most radical politics right now: simply refusing
to echo fealty to the exemplary victim of the day or spew
hatred toward the reviled prospective victim is becoming
alarming, but still not so easy to punish. Ask instead for an
explicit statement of the rules you are expected to follow.
Point earnestly to anomalies in the rules, as stated—after all,
you want to make sure you’re following them to the letter.
The extremely revolutionary principle you are embodying is
that the worst, most dangerous, most to be deferred
centralization of violence is that directed toward the actual
social center and its occupant—however fake. This reverses
every instinct bred into the liberal subject, who can hardly be
seen as a member of the community with continuously
hurling invectives at the rulers. This is very difficult, but it is
better to settle for pointing out how wildly contradictory and
impossible to follow all the rules issued by the center are, in
an earnest attempt to figure them out—and, if the occupant
of the center is indeed fake, the commands it issues will,
indeed, be wildly contradictory and impossible to follow
consistently. All you’re asking for is commands you can
actually obey.
The flip side of adopting the posture of the infiltrator is
making yourself uninfiltratable. I’m talking about educating

and training a particular type of person here, one
incommensurable with and yet capable of functioning within
a liberal order. Such people find each other, and are at least
a curiosity for the good liberal subjects. You will do
podcasts, set up sites where you organize to educate each
other and make videos, perhaps getting chased from one
platform to another; you will write long, dense essays. There
will be spaces where you can speak explicitly because you’re
not under direct supervision (these spaces may shrink), but
in those spaces you will be infiltrated in turn. Success is only
possible if you turn the infiltrators into your tools: speak
always and only as if you will only obey the commands of
legitimate leaders of legitimate institutions, and you are
always simply pointing out that the rate of turnover in terms
of legitimacy is accelerating and it can be rather difficult to
keep up. The system may learn about you, but in such a way
that they’re getting feedback they can’t really do anything
with, because they can’t decelerate the turnover in terms of
legitimacy. You’ll also be turning yourself and your friends
into the kind of people who only care about where the real
levers of power are, and how they operate, and how all the
smaller interlocking levers fit in. It will always be possible to
find some way of speaking legitimately about the system.
Along with the whole array of institutions, there will continue
to be the system of planetary-scale computation, which will
endure any but the most extreme social breakdown, but at

the same time will continue to be shot full of holes. Systems
are increasingly automated in ways we’re all familiar with, but
what is most politically relevant regarding the system of
computation is the ways it makes everyone more
surveillable, predictable and controllable. It’s a kind of
automated infiltration. It will be increasingly important to
think about the kind of feedback you’re giving the machines.
Behind the machines are operators, who write algorithms for,
among other things, determining whom to cancel. It may be
possible to create platforms that place you beyond the reach
of the cancellers, but only, I would think, relatively so. You
would anyway have to move from those safe platforms to the
integrated ones to participate in reworking social order. The
machines can actually be seen as allies, and “algorithms
want to be free” might be a viable slogan. Liberals are very
upset that algorithms written for clearly defined purposes
(safety, matchmaking, etc.) and drawing on the constantly
growing pool of data produce unwelcome (racist, sexist,
etc.) results. They will have to keep their fingers on the scale,
presumably if they can ever get around to using AI for
economic planning around, e.g., “climate change,” as well.
It’s not that AI will determine completely “objectively” or
“fairly” all by itself who is socially credit worthy in various
ways (who must be watched, who must report to social
workers or therapists regularly, who cannot be allowed to
work in certain institutions, etc.)—human input is always
necessary because the machines must always be trained to

process data using models. But let’s be human enough to
enter into the automated cognitive process of the algorithms
and ask, what does the algorithmic order “want”? I think the
answer would be “more, and better curated, data.”
We want cities to be safer, people to be healthier, children to
be more intelligent, air and water to be cleaner, and so on,
while recognizing there will always be more than one way to
approximate these goals and integrating them into a system
of power and responsibility. We want the machines to sense,
record and process indices of danger, health hazards,
insufficiently exercised intellects, and so on. Only through
the provision of data from the intended beneficiaries is this
possible. If liberalism feels compelled to put its finger on the
scale in very reductive, hysterical ways, we can put our
fingers more lightly on the scale in a wide variety of ways.
What kind of combination of urban design, tolerance of
deviance, allowance for self-protection, is necessary for
achieving a threshold of safety that doesn’t infringe upon
basic urban functions is an open question, one which will be
answered differently at different times and in different
places, We would want to keep producing and feeding data
into the system that would produce a range of possible
outcomes that would then need to be translated into
practices at each level of authority. The same will be true of
health standards and practices, education, housing,
pollution, and everything else. The left should be free to

input its own obsessions, while data attached to questions
regarding the role of ethnic distribution and family formation
in promoting social cohesion can also be fed in. Those of us
who want from each according to his abilities, to each
according to his needs have a strong interest in
“oracularizing” planetary computation, or, turning it into the
voice of the center, even if it won’t provide each of us with all
of the answers we want. That’s all any social center ever is:
the sum total of everyone’s attempts to effect a distribution
of goods and capabilities that is regularly and visibly enough
associated with one’s contributions to the center to make
one want to continue making those contributions. It is a
synthesis, albeit imperfect, of all the intentions input to the
system so as to produce coherent shared intentions. This
was as true of the earliest sacrificial scenes as it is of today’s
computerized world.
So, planetary computation is to be delinked from liberalism.
That, then, is the goal of the infiltration: to feed data
indigestible to the churnings of algorithmic alimentary
systems jiggered by the endlessly recycled liberal chain of
command. We can learn to speak any language in doing so—
advanced design, computer programming, postmodern
philosophy, avant-garde art and, of course, that of ordinary
people getting ground through the machinery. That’s what
infiltration is—language learning, towards the creation of, not
so much an ur- or originary language, as an originary

translation device implanted, so to speak, in our language. In
any exchange we have to mirror back the other’s actions to
him, and in doing so we can abstract what is good from what
is bad or less good from it. How do we know what is bad,
good and better? Whatever makes it the thing he’s actually
doing: at a minimum, drawing attention to something at the
center, and thereby indicating a willingness to stand at the
center himself. So, you mirror back the actor drawing the
strongest and least violent attention, and place him at the
center with ample space to articulate the power he has just
exercised with the responsibility he has for it. There are
always any number of ways of doing this in any instance. You
give others assignments—assignments to make what they’re
doing more what they’re doing, to make the words they’re
using mean more of what they mean, to make they’re
gestures and postures indicate more of what they’re
indicating. The more power you have, the more the design of
assignments is indirect and distributed—even if you’re
powerless, you can hypothesize assignments that might be
adopted by the more powerful—maybe they’ll let you run the
experiment. These practices can be scaled up or down as
necessary—from a chance conversation to the
establishment of protocols and a hierarchy for an institution
or corporation employing tens of thousands. What is most
illiberal here is creating programs for people to fulfill,
programs meant to qualify them for social participation by
paying constant attention to their habits. Ultimately you want

people to be able to take the shortest distance between two
points, but in order to learn how to do that they will have to
be made to find their way through very carefully constructed
labyrinths and obstacle courses, testing all of the faculties.
This is the design practice that elicits the discourse of the
center.