Generative Anthropology as
the One Big Discipline
Adam Katz

Department of English
Quinnipiac University
Hamden, CT 06518
Adam.Katz@quinnipiac.edu

If the originary hypothesis entails that all human possibilities
must be implicit in, and therefore traceable back to, the
originary scene, then it follows that Generative Anthropology
must be the human science. And if Generative Anthropology
is the human science, it must be both incommensurable with
and inclusive of all existing human sciences. This places
thinkers within GA in a somewhat anomalous position: a tiny,
at best barely noticed minority within the human sciences
considering itself the practitioners of the only genuine
science. This raises the question of what our relationship to
the other human sciences should be. But before that
question comes another one: what, exactly, counts as a
human science, and what should a human science be doing?
The notion that the human sciences should be modeled on
the physical sciences, presupposing an objective, neutral
observer, universally transparent categories and even

mathematical methods, and the equivalent of the
experimental method, has been discredited. The fact that
human inquirers are part of the phenomena they are
inquiring into makes the human sciences a qualitatively
different enterprise. (I will leave aside the question of how
unquestioned these assumptions are for the physical
sciences themselves.)

We cannot establish any pre- or trans-historical starting
point for the human sciences—we always begin within
traditions of inquiry. All of these traditions have their origin in
some break with one ritual or mythological order or another.
Some kind of institution or practice that is unintelligible, and
yet a source of sanctioned behavior and modes of activity
within the existing order, must be what initiates the break
and prompts attempts to understand it. Institutions such as
money, markets, writing, and republican and democratic
governments might all qualify, and, indeed, we see all of
these in what, in the West at least, is the first human science,
Greek philosophy. The question addressed by Plato in The
Republic is still the question all human sciences, more or less
directly, must be trying to ask: what is a good way for people
to live together? Within a ritual order, such questions could
not be asked: the way to live is the way we have always lived,
as prescribed by the ritual order and explained by the
mythological order. So, a recognition of some disordering
element, and a consideration of how to return to a “good”

order, is central to the human sciences.

Richard Seaford makes a very strong case for money being
the disordering element at the origin of ancient Greek
metaphysics. The universality, eternity, and convertibility of
money all find their equivalents in metaphysics, and Seaford
even provides a compelling reading of Greek tragedy,
showing that money is recognized as the disordering
element in the Greek polis. Furthermore, the various
antinomies of metaphysics, such as between the material
and the ideal, the individual and society, all find their
equivalent in money as well. At the same time, metaphysics
had to be written down, the effect of writing and the
subsequent confusion over the meaning of words was
systematically reflected upon in Plato’s texts, and a parallel
tradition represented by scholars like Eric Havelock, Walter
Ong, and, more recently, David Olson, has, equally
compellingly, identified the structure of writing with the form
of post-mythical thought. These are overlapping and
complementary analyses—I am just giving a reason why I am
going to proceed to make sense of the development of the
human sciences in terms of writing, while making the point
that I would be more than happy to see the same set of
questions pursued from the standpoint of the emergence of
the full monetization Seaford locates in ancient Greece.

If the human sciences emerge out of the identification of an

element that disorders the ritual/mythical order while
creating at least the elements or possibility of a new order,
we can further assume that some mythical form or content
must remain within the new human science, and
furthermore, that anything that we could take to be a
genuine advance in the human sciences would be the
elimination of some mythical element in the discourse or
discipline in question, and its replacement with a concept
generated within that discourse or discipline. That concept
will be, further, a contribution to the distinction between the
(dis)ordering element and the ritual/mythical order from
which it breaks. It is under such conditions that we could
speak of the emergence of a “discipline”: to be within the
discipline is to take as the center of your attention the de-
mythicizing (dis)ordering institution or practice; to remain
outside of the discipline is to indiscriminately mix mythical
with post-mythical elements. So, we now have a preliminary
way of talking about what would count as a genuine tradition
of inquiry within the human sciences.

We also have a way of distinguishing between stronger and
weaker contributions to any such tradition. Certainly one
criterion would be, as I have just pointed out, identifying the
break between the mythical and post-mythical, and tracing
all the consequences of the break. But a more
comprehensive criterion would be—since, after all, whatever
enabled the break must have already been possible within

the mythical—which discourse can conceptualize the break
while simultaneously identifying the continuity from the one
social order to the other. But if the new order has an origin in
such a break, while nevertheless sharing with that earlier
social order some previous origin, the human sciences must
either address (“scientifically”) or suppress (“mythically”)
the problem of origins. That means that the question
regarding a “good” social order becomes the question: why
is there a social/human order in the first place? The problem
of origins is in its intrinsically paradoxical character, as was
already noted by Plato at the origin of metaphysics:
whatever we see in the new form must have already been
present, at least potentially, in the old form. How could a
human science, then, hypothesize regarding the origin
without simply projecting back into the previous form those
features of the human that most define our current order,
which, after all, is the most fully developed form of the
human as such? This projection of current social relations
back to earlier ones is the mythical form taken by the human
sciences: it is equivalent to the explanation of ritual by myth.
It is easy to see why speculation on origins, whether of
humanity or even of a relatively trivial cultural form, is almost
unanimously denounced. But such denunciations cannot
prevent historical and cross-cultural inquiries from
mythicizing in this way: only a genuinely post-mythical
science of the originary can do so.

The originary hypothesis provides such a science. An
account of the origins of the originary hypothesis will help us
to understand how this can be the case. Eric Gans’s account
of his articulation of Rene Girard and Jacques Derrida points
us in two extremely interesting directions. First, through
th
Derrida, to the “linguistic turn” in 20 century thought, that
not quite conclusive blow to traditional metaphysics, which
imposed the recognition that every concept is constituted by
the subordinate term to which it nevertheless claims priority;
second, through Girard, back through a history of inquiries
th
(including Freud and early 20 century anthropology) into
constitutive violence, into what we might call that in the
archaic world which our modernity leaves us least prepared
to see. This yoking together of, not opposites but certainly
“disparates,” is a disciplinary origin we can always return to
as ground. For Derrida, of course, his deconstruction of the
speech/writing distinction is a decentering move, but the
fact that this decentering can never be definitively
accomplished seems to suggest a permanence to the
“center” beyond whatever form of political oppression
Derrida and his successors might like to attribute to it. In that
case, the sign creates the center through deferral, and it is a
center that could always be decentered—by another center.
The fact that the sign can be repeated, or iterated, is the
foundation of writing, but is “always already” to be found in
speech or, for that matter, in the aborted gesture of
appropriation the originary hypothesis takes to be at the

origin of the human. And it is that iterated sign that makes it
possible to account for why even the scapegoat scene
Girard constructs could be memorable, and accrete new
layers of ritual and myth; and if Girard’s scapegoat scene
requires the sign, then the generation of the sign no longer
requires the scapegoating.

So, it is this relation between the iterability of the sign, the
center that makes that iterability possible, and the
participants on the margin who construct themselves
through this relation to the center that provides for the
continuity from the ritual/mythic to an order in which norms
and mimetic models must refer explicitly to social, or
desacralized relations. Derridean deconstruction pointed to
mythical residues in the human sciences, and even to a ritual
violence implicit in perpetual recentering, while in finding this
violence to reside in language, he developed the victimary
tendency in postmodern culture to its furthest extent. The
problem of human origin becomes the problem of controlling
violence as it becomes the problem of the origin of
language. Only the most stubborn mythical element of the
human sciences, the belief that structures are enduring
while events are mere effects of those structures, which is to
say, that the declarative sentence represents reality
comprehensively while the more restricted speech forms
merely “implement” declarative statements, needs to be
overcome.  The originary hypothesis accomplishes this

through the claim that only in a singular event could a sign
both marginally and qualitatively different from a gesture of
appropriation be the vehicle of the discovery that signs defer
violence.

If myths explain rituals, the human sciences study practices
that refer to some social center. The conceptual equipment
of Greek philosophy may have been provided by the
emergence of money and writing, but its explicit object of
inquiry was the social order in the age of the “tyrant,” that is,
the post-sacral king who made visible, by exploiting it, the
class differences of the post-ritual order. A good society
was, in its initial formulation, a society without tyranny, and
for the human sciences this has not changed. The terms of
all human practices are set by a social center that may, or
may not be, tyrannical—depending on what the human
sciences tell us. Every event is therefore a judgment of the
social center. But every event is also an event of language.
The emergence of the post-sacral order in which “tyranny”
becomes possible coincides with the emergence of
alphabetic writing, itself a product, according to the scholar
of literacy, David Olson, of the transformation of language
itself into an object of inquiry, starting with the invention of
the alphabet to represent speech, but ultimately focused on
the problem of reproducing a speech situation in the new
medium of writing. This leads to the need to distinguish,
metalinguistically, between (using the terminology of

analytical philosophy) “using” and “mentioning” words, with
the latter referring to an inquiry into how language is used.

With writing, then, comes linguistic metalanguage: implicit,
tacit norms of speech are made explicit, and therefore
systematized. This means that language use can be
assessed: words can be spelled correctly or incorrectly;
words can be used properly (according to their agreed upon
definition) or improperly; sentences can be grammatical or
ungrammatical. With these distinctions come others,
concerning clarity and logicality:

The metalinguistic concept of a sentence brings these
underlying structures into consciousness as objects with
particular properties such as clear or ambiguous,
grammatical or ungrammatical, and, importantly, as implied
or entailed. Such inferences are justified by appeal to
wording rather than belief. (116).

The question of implications and entailments are particularly
important here because these concepts implicate the
expectations we have of one another in a literate culture. The
distinction between the “words on the page” and intended
meaning is constitutive of a literate culture, and when
someone is considered a “bad reader,” what is usually meant
is that he or she fails to make this distinction consistently.
The metalanguage for representing speech acts in written
discourse includes all of the concepts one is expected to use

as a “critical thinker”:

The concept sentence is special in that it allows one to treat
an expression as mentioned rather than used and to
comment on it as grammatical, as a premise, as entailed by
an earlier sentence and so on. This lexicon is greatly
elaborated in literate discourse to include such concepts as
statement, claim, assertion, suggestion, inference, or
conclusion, concepts important for critical thought. (125)

Writing, then introduces a disciplinary structure into
language, bringing into focus features of language that can
then be used for purposes of inquiry and instruction. This
also means, that while distinctions between written spoken
language and persist, the capacities for thinking generated
by literate metalanguage enter into and restructure spoken
language as well: we certainly don’t need to write in order to
be able to “infer” or “doubt.”

The implications of literate metalanguage go much further.
Olson, in his earlier The World on Paper, had pointed out
that the written sentence represents an entire speech act,
but it must do so without the thick context that embeds
speech carried out by members of a community, in a specific
situation. For example, in an oral culture, if one person, in
reporting another’s speech, wanted to communicate the
uncertainty of that other person, she could simply repeat
what that person said in a hesitant tone of voice. “Tone” is

one of the many elements of the speech situation that is
unavailable in writing, so, the uncertainty must be conveyed
with words: it is possible, of course, to simply write, “he
wasn’t sure,” but various other ways are developed to
convey a wide range of tones: he “suggested,” “conjectured,”
“believed,” and so on. Good writing, in this case, would be
writing that sufficiently supplements what is lost in
“translation” from spoken to written language.

Olson comes back to this question, in his recent The Mind
on Paper, by addressing the norms of “prose,” by way of
Mark Turner and Francis-Noel Thomas’s Clear and Simple as
the Truth: Writing Classic Prose:

The classical style takes for granted two of the features that
modern, enlightened readers now find objectionable, the
assumption that language is transparent to the reality it
describes and, second, that it can reveal object [sic?] truths.
Further, the Classical style even denies it is a style; it takes
itself to be a naked, natural way of speaking… I shall regard
the Classical style as the set of norms and standards for
evaluating prose in a way similar to those norms that
regulate the meaning of words and the logical properties of
sentences. Thus prose is a critical, metalinguistic concept
that articulates the norms and standards for much of written
language and, subsequently, for careful speech. (142)

It is easy to see that the goal of classic prose is to

recuperate the distinction between written and spoken
language, or to simulate the assimilation of the former to the
latter. The writer of classical prose effaces himself, simply
pointing out something in reality that he, along with his
readers, look at. In other words, he constructs a scene that
remains tacit, and invites a suspension of disbelief allowing
the reader to inhabit that same scene, viewing the same
object or event, as if converging lines united the two points
of view on a single center. Classical prose is an almost
perfect example of what Derrida called “presence,” and the
entire post-structuralist critique of “metaphysics” could
perhaps be made much “clearer” if resituated as an
argument over the extent to which we should accept what
Olson calls the “conceits” of classical prose.

Where the critiques of metaphysics have been right in an
extremely important way is in noting that what are in fact
features of the metalanguage of literacy used to assess
written discourse get retrojected as features of the human
“mind” or “nature” that the categories of written
metalanguage merely construct representationally. To define
the human being as a “rational animal,” for example, is to
read a feature of written discourse back into the form of
human being that produced that kind of discourse. To take
“logic” as a natural way of representing how the mind works
and building entire cognitive science empires out of it is to
do the same. The metalanguage of literacy supplements the

speech scene represented by writing: Olson focuses on
mental and speech act verbs like “assume,” “suppose,”
“contend,” “assert,” which supplement what Anna
Wierzbicka shows to be universally shared primes like
“think,” “say,” and “know,” and are in turn nominalized into
“suppositions,” “assertions,” and so on. Once we have these
reifications, a disciplinary space focused on the relation, say,
between “assumptions” and “statements” can be created.

To return to my opening discussion, I have been taking
writing, as it has taken shape, through the metalanguage of
literacy, studying the possibilities of iterating speech scenes
as written (and read) texts in “classic prose” as the
(dis)ordering social element that brings forth the kind of
shared reflection and discourse ultimately institutionalized in
the disciplines of the human sciences. All of the founding
concepts of the human sciences, ancient and modern, like
“society,” “mind,” “religion,” “language,” “intention” and so on
are all supplemental “grounds” for the objects constructed
within the disciplines. The point is not that the “entities”
named by those words/concepts don’t exist; rather, it’s that
they exist as products of inquiry within disciplines, within
traditions of inquiry, which is to say that they have a
provenance and can and often should be revised or
replaced. By now it is a commonplace to point out that to
use a word like “religion” to refer to all the various forms of
Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, Voodoo, tribal rituals,

and so on is modeled on Protestantism, with its distinction
between “individual faith,” on the one hand, and either
Church or State, on the other. To take the example of
“intention,” meanwhile, the problem of identifying another’s
“intention” is a post-literate one because it presupposes the
possibility that the speaker’s meaning might be different
than the meaning of the words or sentences uttered by the
speaker. To speak about “intention” is to direct attention to
the former.

Since the distinction between the speaker’s meaning and the
meaning of words is central to the problem posed to writing
of representing speech in abstraction from presence on the
scene of speech, we can see the word/concept of “meaning”
at the center of the metalanguage of literacy and, therefore,
of the disciplines. What we could see as the founding of the
disciplines in Plato’s Republic does place “meaning” at the
center: for example, the meaning of the word “good.” This is
in fact an excellent example of the founding of the human
sciences around some (dis)ordering, emergent social
element. The word “good,” which is unproblematic as an
adjective modifying various ways of being and activities (a
good baker, a good warrior, a good father, etc.), which all
have their definition and evaluation implicit in the practices
they are embedded in, becomes problematic when it
becomes necessary to name, describe, and assess activities
that don’t fall into traditional categories. It is only then that it

becomes possible to ask whether someone is a “good
person,” or a “good citizen,” or, indeed, to inquire into nouns
like “goodness” or “the Good.” The human sciences have
never moved beyond this inquiry into the meaning of words,
and cannot do so, no matter how data-driven they become.

Here, Peirce’s pragmatism, which is the first attempt to think
disciplinarity I am familiar with, is especially helpful, because
for Peirce, pragmatism is “merely a method of ascertaining
the meaning of hard words and abstract concepts.” And the
method of doing this “is no other than that experimental
method by which all the successful sciences . . . have
reached the degrees of certainty that are severally proper to
them today” (“Pragmatism in Retrospect: A Last
Formulation,” Buchler, 271). Pragmatism would then be a
kind of metalanguage of disciplinarity, or perhaps an
infralanguage, insofar as it need do no more than test the
meaning of words on their own terms:

The meaning of a proposition is itself a proposition. Indeed, it
is no other than the very proposition of which it is the
meaning: it is a translation of it. But of the myriads of forms
into which a proposition may be translated, what is the one
that is to be called its very meaning? It is, according to the
pragmaticist, that form in which the proposition becomes
applicable to human conduct, not in these or those special
circumstances, not when one entertains this or that special

design, but that form which is most directly applicable to
self-control under every situation, and to every purpose.
That is why he locates the meaning in future time, for future
conduct is the only conduct that is subject to self-control.
But in order that that form of the proposition which is to be
taken as its meaning should be applicable to every situation
and to every purpose upon which the proposition has any
bearing, it must be the simply the general description of all
the experimental phenomena which the assertion of the
proposition virtually predicts.  (261)

So, if we advance a scientific proposition, or, let’s say, a
claim about reality, the meaning of that proposition is to be
found in the future conduct it predicts. That conduct will be
shaped by “special circumstances” and “special designs,”
from which we must abstract the general form of conduct
we have in mind. The forms of conduct which are then to be
taken as tests of the proposition will themselves be
embedded in yet other special circumstances and special
designs. One “situation,” in which the conduct is set, must
be distinguished from other situations. Peirce is laying the
groundwork for conceptual distinctions that will have to be
made by future inquirers, and those future inquirers will be
among those whose conduct is being predicted. Those
future inquirers, since they are above all interested in inquiry,
and therefore truth, and therefore in separating the objects
of their inquiry from those presuppositions and concerns

which threaten to put an end to that inquiry, will also be
especially interested in acquiring the self-control regarding
their own habits that is the effect and secondary aim of
inquiry. In the process of inquiry, the participants will
generate as many translations of the proposition into other
propositions, experiments, and forms of conduct as possible
—otherwise, how could the discipline determine which is to
be called its very meaning? Thus, “[e]very connected series
of experiments constitutes a single collective experiment”
(260).  Pierce would restrict this all embracing mode of
inquiry in which, as a later philosopher of science, Gaston
Bachelard, would predict, “social interests will then be
reversed once and for all: society will be made for school,
not school for society” (The Formation of the Scientific Mind,
249) to “hard words” and “abstract concepts,” but wouldn’t
the distinctions between “hard” and “easy” words, and
“abstract” and “concrete” concepts, also have to made by
some discipline—a discipline that might very well redraw
these boundaries? With Pierce, then, we have a conception
of disciplinarity as open-ended and aiming at discovering
truths that will be universally acknowledged and taken into
the formation of habit and conduct, while being at the same
time dependent upon the collective conduct of those who
will have to follow a proposition through its myriad
translations, knowing that the final one will never be arrived
at.

So, we have the discipline of writing, which generates the
metalanguage of literacy, which in turn launches a whole
fleet of what Marshall McLuhan might have called
“sleepwalking” disciplines that essentially reiterate the terms
of that metalanguage. This would include every single
discipline in the human sciences. Trying to define or analyze
an entity like “mind” is, then, an essentially mystified
endeavor. This is where Eric Gans’s definition of metaphysics
as the assumption that the declarative sentence is the
primary linguistic form takes on highly consequential
implications. Metaphysics itself is just an inflation and
concealment of the metalanguage of literacy which reduces
language to its elements, which are in turn both real entities
and parts of larger systems. To define a word is to treat it as
convertible into declarative sentences, and to make it
inextricable from its grammatical relations. Again, I am not
quite saying that phenomena like “mind,” “religion,”
“language” and so on don’t exist—rather, I am saying that
they exist as effects of disciplinary events that obscure the
origins and therefore meanings of these words themselves.
In working to turn originary thinking into one big discipline
we uncover those origins or originary structures and thereby
transform the objects.

Since writing is only possible because all signs are iterable,
writing doesn’t come from the outside and invade an
innocent oral culture—writing and the metalanguage of

literacy it generates simply elicits, in a particular way, what is
already internal to language. What I propose targeting in the
metalanguage of literacy is that it conceals its own originary
structure by treating signs as direct representations of
“things,” “ideas,” “thoughts,” and so on. The metalanguage
of literacy creates a system of cross-referential
nominalizations that purports to represent “reality.” This is
what renders it immune to originary hypothesizing, and the
best way to address this immunity is to treat all human
activity as originary hypothesizing. All questions of discourse
and intellectual activity are therefore questions of what we
might call the re-discovery of language rather than relations
between language and something external, whether in the
world or the mind (everything external is already in
language). Originary thinking as the one big discipline is,
therefore, to use a term taken from Bruno Latour,
infralinguistic rather than metalinguistic:

We have to resist pretending that actors have only a
language while the analyst possesses the meta-language in
which the first is ‘embedded’. As I said earlier, analysts are
allowed to possess only some infra-language whose role is
simply to help them become attentive to the actors’ own
fully developed meta-language, a reflexive account of what
they are saying. In most cases, social explanations are
simply a superfluous addition that, instead of revealing the
forces behind what is said, dissimulates what has been said,

as Garfinkel has never tired of showing. (49)

Latour associates metalinguistic “explanations” that posit
some hidden “real” “behind” the intentions of actors with the
implication of the modern social sciences in social
engineering.  The implication is that the human sciences
should help others, including other human scientists, to find
the meaning of what they are saying, and in the process to
develop new linguistic capacities to discover what we are
saying. We might say than rather than generate the terms on
which we identify, denounce, apologize for, constrain, or
convert actual or budding “tyrants,” the disciplines of the
human sciences might help make explicit the ongoing
negotiations between a given practice and the social center.

The founding gesture of a discipline is to turn a
nominalization produced elsewhere within the literate order
into one that can guide inquiry: for example, from
“hooliganism” as a pattern named by the press to “anti-
social behavior,” with “causes.” This conversion further
entails identifying some scene and event, however abstract,
upon which a collective or typical agent does something
(“History” is the biggest scene of all). The agent in question
might be an author or artist, a nation, state, ethnicity or
class, a worshipper, a mind, a gendered subject, a citizen.
The concepts and arguments within the discipline consist of
differing ways of distinguishing between what the agent

meant in doing whatever it does, and what it means that the
agent meant that. Now, what it means to do that is to
construct a relation between some margin and some center,
a relation we can always locate in whatever distinction,
implicit or explicit, the disciplinary language itself makes
between unmarked and marked “doings” and “happenings.”
For the disciplines, the center is not a ritual center to which
donations are given and from which benefits are expected to
flow; it is a source of authorized action that, if iterated, will
convert resentments into sharing among those iterating it.
We don’t agree on which model of action fits this
description, hence the discipline, but we can now identify
what the agents acting within the discipline are attempting,
and have always been attempting.

The infra and transdisciplinary inquiry into the discipline
deploys the nominalizations generated by the discipline—
“genre,” “norm,” “belief,” “behavior,” “mind,” “subject,” “text,”
and so on—to mark differences in the activity within the
discipline itself. Everyone within the discipline becomes a
bearer of its originary structure. The question introduced
into the discipline, then, is what model of inquiry identifies
and enacts the model of action that converts resentments
into love. In this case, the model of action itself becomes a
model of inquiry: the agents we study are also seeking the
authorization of the center. Any nominalization can be used
to initiate this inquiry, by turning the nominalization into a

verb referring to the disciplinary activity trying to name the
objects of its activity. In generating disciplinary events, the
way of thinking predicated upon the event-al nature of the
human can effect a continuous interference within the
discipline. The meaning of this kind of interference is to
make the question of meaning as centrality permanent
across the disciplines—to make it so that those within the
discipline cannot think about what they’re doing outside of
this question.

A transdisciplinary practice of GA, then, involves working
within the disciplines, probing the meaning of their
constitutive concepts whose origin has been occluded or
forgotten. This involves a combination of attentiveness and
respect, on the one hand, with complete irreverence, on the
other. We should feel free to start from the assumption that
any and all concepts might be arbitrary impositions, situated
within historical, social and political settings that have
provided them with values other than those of unfettered
inquiry. Disciplines inquire into their own histories all the
time, of course, and into the histories of their concepts, but
what they can’t do is simultaneously address the word and
the referent—why is there this entity we call “society” or
“mind,” and why do we call it “society” or “mind”? It’s
possible, within the disciplines, to redefine one or the other—
to say, “mind” should really mean y instead of x, or the
concept of “society” is strictly limited to post-ritual orders.

But the co-constitution of word and entity cannot be
grasped, because that lies in the emergence of the human
science disciplines from their (dis)ordering post-
ritual/mythical elements, an emergence that I have identified
with the creation of a literate order.

The meaning of a word, a sentence, a discourse is in its
origin, but its origin is not simply a reference to something
that happened, after which other things happened because
of it. An origin is the creation of shared attention directed at
something, and of those sharing that attention becoming
who and what they are because of it. History is less a
straight line and more a series of concentric circles, or
perhaps vortices: each instant of shared attention includes
the attention directed to the practice that created the
previous such instant—it retrieves from that practice
whatever will provide the increment of deferral needed to
ensure that shared attention is sustained. Origins are
inscribed within any practice, and we can always locate at
least a hypothetical version of them in our practices. A
practice, in Alisdair MacIntyre’s words, is

Any coherent and complex form of socially established
cooperative human activity through which goods internal to
that form of activity are realized in the course of trying to
achieve those standards of excellence which are appropriate
to, and partially definitive of that form of activity, with the

result that human powers to achieve excellence, and human
conceptions to the ends and goods involved, are
systematically extended. (187)

The power of MacIntyre’s definition is that it avoids utilitarian
reductionism, which would see a practice as something one
does for some extrinsically defined purpose, while at the
same time opening up internally constituted and coherent
forms of activity and life to the transcendence they are
always already constituted by. For MacIntyre’s concepts like
“goods” and “excellences,” I would use terms indicating an
enhanced relation to a center. A “good” or a form of
“excellence” represents an increment of deferral, and an
increment of deferral is the eliciting of more “information”
from the center. On the originary scene, the central object
“tells” the members on the margin to stay their hands, to
commit no violence against it, and, in committing no violence
against it, commit none against each other. Needless to say,
the words for articulating this imperative were unavailable to
those participants on the originary scene; they are available
to us now because in subsequent scenes a mythological
scene was constructed upon which the central object did
perform certain acts, utter certain words, and interact with
other figures; and, later, with the (dis)ordering impact of
money, writing, and the decline of kingship, it became
necessary to attribute more complex and also more abstract
modes of ordering and distributing to the central entity.

The center, then, persists, and we can say nothing that is not
a speaking of the center. The center persists materially, in
the form of some kind of central authority, without which we
have no record of any community sustaining itself. But at the
same time it persists in the entirety of the ordering of our
practices in such a way as will best ensure that this central
authority, however placed there, does its duty. Out of the
entirety of the ordering of our practices, we can, in further
increments of deferral carried out in disciplinary spaces,
abstract more minimal models of practice from which we can
hypothesize the other elements within the “entirety” might
spring. These minimal models of practice are what we take
ourselves to be doing when we think about what we are
doing, which is, most fundamentally, engaging in inquiry into
the center. Disciplinary inquiry itself, then, models the
practices into which it inquires, by treating those practices
as modes of inquiry. Which means that originary inquirers
are positioned so as to question participants in a given
discipline regarding the meaning of their practices.

There are two possible paths toward one big disciplinarity.
The most familiar one, attempted by virtually every
“revolutionary” theory in the human sciences (historical
materialism, psychoanalysis, even deconstruction in its way)
is the establishment of a controlling meta-language. GA
certainly has the materials for taking this path, in a set of
“foundational” concepts (desire, resentment, deferral,

center, scene, sign, etc.) defined precisely and contextually
through a series of cultural, literary, and social analyses. A
contest of meta-languages is the almost universal, indeed
practically the only conceivable mode of contestation among
competing theories. You put forward your concepts, and I
put forward mine; we then look at various objects of analysis
and each of us provides an “explanation,” with the “better” or
“stronger” one winning.

Of course, this is a big problem, since there is no theory-free
criterion for distinguishing between “stronger” and “weaker”
analyses. We also know that there is no level playing field on
which these meta-theory contests might take place—rather,
the process is historical, with the new theory taking aim at
the dominant one. Post-structuralism hit North America in
the 1980s with sophisticated analyses of the Romantic poets
and canonical novelists like Melville, Hawthorne and Poe
because it was through its readings of such figures that the
established New Criticism controlled the field. Which theory
prevails in the academy might depend far more upon which
provides more opportunity for novel PhD theses, grant
proposals, and tenure track positions, and what determines
that?

I’m not reducing everything to power relations, and both
New Criticism and Poststructuralism provided powerful and,
in their time, innovative ways of reading texts; but it would be

very hard to show that one theory displaced the other simply
because it was “better.” The Kuhnian theory of the
replacement of one theory by another through the
emergence of anomalies in the existing system that multiply
and generate increasingly strained attempts at resolution
within the existing system, ultimately to be resolved within a
new paradigm including the previous one as a limit case,
might describe what happens in the natural sciences (I have
my doubts). But when it comes to the human sciences, there
is no doubt that a far more complicated process, closer to
the kinds of transformations described by Paul Feyerabend,
in which economics, politics, and institutional imperatives
weigh heavily, determines the outcome. We will never be
able to market our wares in a free and open marketplace
before informed “consumers,” and it’s hard to see even a
younger, leaner and meaner generation of originary thinkers
(were such to emerge) engaging in the kind of marketing and
politicking and just sheer ganging up that would be required
for a theory to prevail in the universities.

There’s another reason to be skeptical about the grand field
of meta-theoretical contest. Such struggles encourage
polemics, and polemics encourage the hardening of lines,
the fetishization of intellectual materials and the introduction
of coercion into matters where it has no rightful place. It was
not only Marxists who turned conceptual differences into life
and death organizational struggles (and vice versa);

psychoanalysis almost immediately split into competing
versions, with each singling out a particular element of
Freud’s analysis and anathematizing the others.  It was not
very different with Derridean, Lacanian, Deleuzean, etc.,
versions of poststructuralism. If there were to be an
institutional stake in GA, enough to draw in “fresh blood,” we
would quickly see lines drawn over “orthodox” and
“heretical” understandings of “resentment,” the “moral
model,” and every other concept. Of course there need to be
discussions and there will always be disagreements over any
theory, GA certainly included, and disagreements, properly
conducted, are generative for any discipline. But the struggle
for institutional mastery doesn’t provide the field in which
those kinds of disagreements could take place. I would also
add that the days of grand theoretical battles in the
university, at least the American university, are probably
over: between victimary inquisitions, budgetary shortfalls,
and the business model imposed on universities, forcing
English Departments as much as anyone else to explain how
they will be providing students with the kind of “critical
thinking skills” they need to get jobs leaves little zest for
genuine theoretical battles.

The other path toward “owning” the transdisciplinary field
has never, as far as I know, been tried. That path is learning
to speak the theoretical languages we wish to supplant. This
is more like body snatching than planet smashing. Let’s take

an example that has come up often lately, due to the
importance of cognitive psychology to the recent GASC
conference in Stockholm: the computer model of the mind.
Obviously the computer model is an antagonist to the
originary hypothesis, insofar as it takes a product of human
thinking aimed at supplementing human thinking in certain
areas and retrojects that product back as the model for
human thinking itself. Saying that the mind is a computer is
not really all that different from saying that our bodies are
automobiles. It defines down the human essence to one of
our tools, rather than engaging in inquiry into the human
essence that enables us to create, use, and criticize
computers and cars and to do many other things as well. But
once we make our arguments, then what? The computer
model of mind enables the inquirer to describe in interesting
and complex ways all kinds of things. If I say that as a result
of “experience” (refining an already existing “feedback
mechanism”) humans construct and continually revise
“algorithms” for determining, automatically, specified
responses to probable phenomena, can it really be asserted
that nothing illuminating can emerge from such an
approach? When I am faced with a “choice,” I can, we might
say, run some probability calculations, based on controlled
scans of the field and subject to time constraints, so as to
continually enhance the “effectiveness” of my choices. At
the very least, the computer model is a source of
provocative metaphors and ways of subverting various

sentimentalisms.

We can certainly speak and think in these ways because the
“computer model of mind” is a language, with its rules,
idioms and tacit assumptions (to use a famous metaphor
from Wittgenstein, it’s one of those newer suburbs built, in a
planned and grid-like manner, around the more eccentric,
improvised old city—perhaps an industrial park!), and we are
language-using beings. I find it irritating and exhausting to
repeat the same arguments over and over, which is what one
has to do if one is determined to “refute” and “defeat” the
“computer model of mind.” But we can speak to the
computer model of mind by speaking within it. Asking an
adherent to the computer model of mind to lay bare the
algorithms he has followed in constructing an experiment so
as to test the working of the computer model of mind in
some experimental subjects might be more instructive than
hectoring him with its contradictions and dehumanizing
consequences. The computer model of mind, like any
discourse, has its origin and its originary structure (the
iteration of its origin in its ongoing operations), and the way
to discover this is not just by going back to the records of
that conference in 1944 or whenever (unsurprisingly, Ngram
has the “computer model of mind” shooting upward in the
mid-80s), but by noticing what kinds of things must be said
within the discipline and what kinds of things must not be
said: by entering it as if it was just emerging and its terms

need to be learned by applying them to its emergence. By
thus infiltrating the disciplines we might get them to speak
their own truth, which (we must have faith in the power of
our own discourse here) must both iterate and evade its
originary structure.

How do we remember our own origins while thus undercover
in the disciplines; how does One Big Discipline emerge from
what appears to be dispersal? The real “proof” of GA as the
“strongest” theoretical discourse will be that it can keep
showing whatever disciplinary space it inhabits that it needs
the way of thinking only originary thinking can provide to
address the anomalies in its own discourse, anomalies which
the originary disciplinary inquirer will have trained himself to
detect. The proof, that is, is in the way we will have clarified
in a collaborative manner whatever those in that discipline
have devoted themselves to studying—not in how we
distract them by pointing out mistakes that might not seem
such, or seem relevant, to them. If we find ways to
“represent” so as to defer resentments in the course of any
inquiry, we exemplify an originary intellectual “ethic,” which
can in turn become a compelling topic of conversation.
“Our” language, in other words, can take its place within the
disciplinary language, and that is where something like
genuine intellectual competition takes place, through the
framings and counter-framings of intellectual collaborators.
We would have to have faith that one day all might wake up

and find themselves speaking generative anthropology; of
course, along the way something like a crisis would have to
take place in each of the various disciplines, and a
substantial part of what we are studying now are the
elements of that possible crisis.

One pertinent example of a transdisciplinary project both
allied with and serving as a useful model for GA is Anna
Wierzbicka’s Natural Semantic Metalanguage. That
Wierzbicka harbors such ambitions for her NSM is evident
not just from her own references to Leibniz’s aspiration to
create a “universal characteristic” as an inspiration, but from
her use of the NSM to critique the limitations of other
disciplines. So, for example, she points out that many
evolutionary psychologists “attribute the human evolutionary
success in large part to early humans’ superior capacity for
‘mindreading’” (Imprisoned in English, 156). Wierzbicka goes
on to point out that

“Mindreading” is a nice metaphor, but not a self-explanatory
one, and like many other such metaphors popular among
scientists, it is bound to English, because “mind” is an
English word with no exact counterparts in most other
languages of the world. In its present day meaning, mind
focuses on thinking and knowing, to the exclusion of
emotions and values, and is quite different in this respect
from the main counterparts of BODY encoded in other

languages….” (157)

In an instance particularly relevant to GA, in Chapter 13 of
her Imprisoned in English, she addresses the work of
evolutionary cognitive psychologists like Michael Tomasello,
Derek Bickerton, Merlin Donald and others. She not only
points out the limitations of their accounts of the emergence
of the human due to their assumption of the universality of
English words like “believe,” “understand,” “perception,” and
“goal,” but rewrites in primes the successive cognitive
revolutions hypothesized by these thinkers as having
effected the transition from ape to human. She is able to
conclude:

From an NSM perspective, evidence reviewed in studies
such as those mentioned above suggests that the
“representational resources” of chimpanzees include
conceptual primes KNOW, SEE, WANT, and DO, but do not
include THINK, which we find in the human language of
thought… Whether or not one accepts this conclusion, the
methodological point still holds: here as elsewhere issues
can be clarified if the debate is freed from the conceptual
dependence on English and articulated in simple, stable, and
cross-translatable words like see, want, know and think (and,
as noted before, say). (171)

So, Wierzbicka sees her NSM as providing the basis for a
transdisciplinary accounting for everything human. But her

approach is so radical that it subverts the way I think we
would be most likely to think about a grand transdisciplinary
breakthrough—ordinarily, such a breakthrough would involve
a new way of “explaining” everything, which is to say a
reduction to a more abstract metalanguage. That wouldn’t
satisfy Wierzbicka, though, because any such unified field
theory would be offering its explanations in a particular
language, assuming the transparency of culturally specific
terms, and therefore no explanations at all. For Wierzbicka,
the transdiscipline must translate all of human thought and
action into a single, minimal language shared by all
languages. This would really involve a rejection of
explanation as the purpose of the social sciences, because,
once everything can be translated in those words that can
themselves be translated no further because they are
immediately intelligible, what is there to explain?
Explanations just translate into a more abstract language
what people would ordinarily discuss in more concrete ways,
using everyday words—if the point is to translate into the
most everyday of the everyday words, the purpose of inquiry
is to contract rather than expand our vocabularies. (Since it
seems to me that a condition of transdisciplinarity on the
terms of the NSM would be to render one’s own basic
concepts and propositions into the primes, I’ll take the initial
step and translate “representation is the deferral of violence”
as follows: “people say words because if people want to do
bad things to others people feel like saying: ‘we don’t want

to do these bad things now’.”)

Indeed, what, exactly, gets “explained” or “proven” in the
human sciences? “Prediction” is meaningless, because
history does not take place in a controlled space where we
can manipulate the variables. Anything we were to take as a
confirmed prediction would depend upon an arbitrary
delineation of the event in question. Did your theory predict
that Donald Trump would win the 2016 presidential election?
First of all, millions of other people, even if they were in the
minority, also predicted this—do their theories also get
confirmed? More important, “Donald Trump elected”
represents a culmination of a whole series of events—did
you predict the precise margin of victory in Michigan? If not,
does someone who came closer than you therefore have a
“better” theory? Why isolate this particular prediction, which
is the kind made by pollsters and bookies, as the “test” of a
particular theory? All such questions are unanswerable, no
matter whether the event we choose is the “financial crisis of
2008,” or the Bolshevik Revolution or Napoleon’s defeat in
Russia. These events are obviously not “isolated” in the way
we would isolate “events” in a laboratory to test the results
of a specific “input,” nor could they be (in a sense, the goal
of “totalitarian” political movements is to make something
like that possible, by making humans fit laboratory subjects
—which means we should want events to be less
predictable). You could certainly be better or worse at

predicting things, but that would say more about your
immediate knowledge of conditions on the ground (an
officer in Napoleon’s army, a stockbroker on Wall Street, who
sets aside his own desires and attempts to game the system,
might do a good job of predicting such things), your wits and
your experience than about the “strength” of your social
theory. The same goes for attempting to test one social form
against another: liberal democracy vs. monarchy vs.
autocracy vs. religious rule, etc.

Can anyone really show that this feature of this kind of
society, which we see manifested in this particular society of
this type in this way, has produced these specific effects,
and will continue to do so in all societies of this type (or this
particular one, for that matter) regardless of the infinite
possible changes in surrounding conditions in the meantime
(some of those changes produced by the “cause” we are
trying to “isolate”)? And, anyway, a social theory can only, in
a circular manner, tell us something about those elements of
the social order it has framed as worthy of note, and of
necessity must ignore whatever does not enter its frame. It’s
possible that one’s predictions might get better as one
focused on smaller and more marginal events. And this is
just as true for what is presumably the “hardest” of the
human sciences, economics. We could say that a better test
of the strength of one’s theory is whether it provides its
adherents the power to refrain from making predictions in

the hope of winning the theory sweepstakes, because it
focuses on something more important. In short, prediction is
simply another mythic element of the human sciences, the
modernized version of divination.

What a human science is for is to help us see the meaning of
events. GA should, I believe share this purpose with
Wierzbicka’s NSM. We take (dis)ordering events, as they are
registered by the most alert, thoughtful and/or symptomatic
testimonies we can find, and we show the difference
between what the speakers mean and what their words
mean. This difference represents the speaker’s
(mis)recognition of what the center has to say. In this way,
we can ask pointed questions of those foundational
disciplinary concepts that are reiterations of the
metalanguage of literacy, and show how those concepts rely
upon retrojected nominalizations. The disciplines
presuppose their break from the ritual/mythic world while
finding it impossible to articulate or even name that break;
and for the same reason they must obscure their continuity
with that world. They are compelled to saturate the speech
situation they are intent on reproducing, which means they
cannot examine the difference between writing and speech
—that difference being writing’s constitutive “vocation” of
studying the difference between speaker’s meaning and
word’s meaning.

A word like “cognition,” for example, is meant to establish a
circumscribed mental “space” wherein certain measurable
and replicable mental events can take place. It’s easy
enough to see that the concept wants to eliminate from
thinking what is singular and unreplicable, whether for
personal or historical reasons, and to exclude from
consideration what is external to the “mind,” such as the
“body” or “language.” So an originary thinker within
psychology might be bound to introduce all of that into
“cognition,” with unpredictable effects upon the concept and
the discipline organized around it. It is this forgetting of
language, in particular, that we will find everywhere in the
disciplines, the forgetting of the fact that concepts are
words, with infralinguistic articulations and histories within
traditions of inquiry; and this forgetting is required because
of another forgetting, that it is precisely the disciplines that
blind us to our (dis)continuity with the archaic scene, a
(dis)continuity that lies at the origin of all the disciplines. To
become one big discipline, it would be sufficient for GA to
keep recalling that.

The best way to elicit meaning from a sign, meanwhile, is to
iterate it. Any repetition is a difference, but experimentation
with a range of iterations, situating the sign in question in
different contexts, with different tones, different “issuers,”
and so on serves to reveal the difference between speaker’s
meaning and sentence’s meaning. All the other possible

meanings of the word can be brought to bear on
hypothesizing possible differences between speaker’s
meanings and sentence meanings. This form of repetition
displaces the kind of repetition that supplements and
saturates a scene of speech. The problem with the
metaphysical non-scene of classical prose is that in
supplementing the scene of recorded speech the writer
relies upon the very nominalizations that a disciplinary scene
of writing would inquire into: not only do specific
“suppositions,” “ideas” and “implications” have histories and
derive from traditions, but so do these very concepts
themselves. Their historiality lies in their creation of a
separate mental scene, unrelated to any center other than
some anti-mythical self-creation. The speech scene is taken
to be more originary than the writing that represents it, and
so metaphysical-classical prose tries to efface the sign in its
referent, while ultimately finding that referent to be nowhere
but in its own self-creating mind. In the end, that’s the only
way of erasing the inexplicable difference between speaker’s
meaning and sentence’s meaning. In practicing the scene of
writing and reading as just as originary as that of speech,
meanwhile, one retrieves the originary gesture of
signification.

Even more, this mode of theorizing brings the constitutive
problem of the good society, or how we are to live together,
to the forefront of all social thinking, within any discipline. If

the purpose or telos of sign use is to repeat the sign in such
a way as to defer the new threat of violence, in the post-
ritual/mythical order this means ensuring commensurability
between speaker’s meaning and word’s meaning. In other
words, the ethical dimension of social thinking aims at
enabling all of us as speakers or sign-users to bring the
meanings we intend into accord with the historical
accretions implicit in the signs we use. Our words, in other
words, should not be at cross-purposes with our intentions,
because when that is the case violence becomes a more
likely way of settling mimetic rivalries.

In becoming one big discipline, GA first of all brings these
two layers of meaning into accord within the disciplines
themselves. The test, finally, of determining the
commensurability of speaker meaning and sentence
meaning in relation to the center is whether the disciplinary
space can generate imperatives around whose fulfillment
new spaces can emerge. David Olson advanced his inquiries
into the cognitive effects of literacy by devising little
experiments that enable us to see whether, say, a child of a
particular age can distinguish between what someone says
and what they mean. A GA transdiscipline, both immodest in
its ambitions and humble in its respect for the accumulated
wisdom of human practices, would do well to propose and
devise such experiments, real and merely hypothetical, as
frames for determining what mode of centrality a particular

practice on the margin must be imagining as it works out the
declarative language necessary for directing and reconciling
the ostensive and imperative field in which it operates.

Olson tests children’s ability to distinguish between
speaker’s meaning and word (or sentence) meaning by
setting up scenarios in which children observe a scene in
which one person provides another with information. The
experimenter then contrives it so the child comes to know
something that either the speaker, the listener, or both, do
not know. The question then becomes whether the child can
distinguish what she knows from what the participants on
the scene know: if the child, for example, has seen the
speaker move some object to the green box after telling the
listener it was in the red box, where will the child think the
listener thinks it is? Distinguishing between the two levels, or
perhaps poles, of meaning, is a question of realizing that
different people can interpret a sentence in different ways,
based upon the prior assumptions they bring to the
situation: this is an ability, Olson hypothesizes, that is part of
the acquisition of literacy. So, what would be the equivalent
in social life of the child who thinks the listener thinks the
object is in the green box because the child knows it is
there? What would be the experiment that would enable us
to test this? And what would be the equivalent of the
acquisition of literacy, which enables the child to distinguish
his own knowledge from another’s?

We have recourse here to our founding concept of “deferral.”
It is deferral that creates the center of the originary scene,
and that therefore enables us to jointly attend to any object
on any scene; and it is the ability to jointly attend to an
object that generates a broader field of actual and possible
objects organized around the central one. So, our question
can be, how differentiated is what one person says from
another person? Still, we’d need to have a clear criterion for
“differentiation”; also, we’d have to take into account the
ways in which, say, a schizophrenic’s or paranoid’s speech
might be highly differentiated in ways that would indicate
something other than an “increment” of deferral. One has to
be able to “point to” the object as others do, and further
direct their attention to something in or about the object
others don’t notice. This “pointing to” would be, in the
discourse employed by our “subject,” an internal, potentially
self-referential marking of the distinction between this
discourse and others. The inquirers themselves would have
to be implicated in what they would take as a possible
inquiry initiated by the subject: the distinctive “marking”
would be distinctive insofar as it points to the resolution of
some “anomaly” in an at least preliminary new “paradigm.”
We inquirers could only notice the marking insofar as we
could contribute to the further construction of the paradigm.

But in social life, the anomalies of a particular paradigm must
be exhausted far more thoroughly than in the laboratory

setting; one might say that even the most apparently
discredited paradigms are never conclusively discarded,
once and for all; indeed, one might even say they never
should be. It may be that pointing out the anomalies,
persistently and ruthlessly, and embodying the position of
the one who bears the exposure of the anomalies, is a way,
or the way, of sustaining the deferral that allows possible
paradigms, or frames, of various uses, to come into view. In
fact, insisting on the anomalous nature of all discourse is a
way of enacting the paradoxicality of all linguistic usage.
Putting forth a speaker’s meaning that is the intent to inhabit
both the “normal” and “revolutionary” positions within the
“sentence’s meaning” would be the necessarily qualitative
test of a further increment of deferral.

So, provide someone with a discourse or, in doing
“fieldwork,” examine the discourse with which one has
provided oneself. Ask, first, what they think “everyone else”
would make of this. They will provide you with an answer
that you could map somewhere from the extreme, on one
side, of saying that what I make of it is what everyone will
make of it (it just means X); to, on the other extreme, of
taking you through the way different readers or listeners
would make sense of this or that portion of the discourse
and therefore the discourse as a whole, differently. In other
words, the “subject” either assumes, according to the
“conceit” of classical prose, that we are all, always, on the

same scene; or the subject is to some extent capable of
participating in the scenic character of knowing. At each
point along the way, we could identify how the ability to
hypothesize new possible readings indicates the ability to
defer the individual’s own imposition of his speaker’s
meaning on the text. The farther along toward this latter pole
the discourse moves, the more it becomes possible to ask,
what would be the reading that would include them all, as an
act of deferral that provides a model for a historically
transformative mode of deferral: what we might call the
originary-originating meaning. Of course, we inquirers would
have to learn how to identify such a reading ourselves. In this
way, the transdiscipline would itself be a mode of language
learning by situating all language users, which is to say all
language learners, within the field of contemporary
language, which is to say, across the array of incremental
deferrals and backslidings that constitute any cultural
moment.

Works Cited

Latour, Bruno. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to
Actor-Network Theory. Oxford University Press, 2005.

MacIntyre, Alisdair. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory,
Second Edition. London: Duckworth, 1985.

Olson, David R. The Mind on Paper: Reading, Consciousness

and Rationality. Cambridge University Press, 2016.

Olson, David R. The World on Paper: The Conceptual and
Cognitive Implications of Writing and Reading. Cambridge
University Press, 1994.

Peirce, Charles Sanders. Philosophical Writings of Peirce.
Edited by Justus Buchler. Dover, 1955.

Seaford, Richard. Money and the Early Greek Mind: Homer,
Philosophy, Tragedy. Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Wierzbicka, Anna. Imprisoned in English: The Hazards of
English as a Default Language. Oxford University Press,
2013.