

An Introduction to
Disciplinarity
Adam Katz
Department of English
Quinnipiac University
Hamden, CT 06518
Adam.Katz@quinnipiac.edu
In his 1968 “Introduction” to his study of The Civilizing
Process, Norbert Elias considers the question of why,
regardless of its theoretical and empirical absurdity, the
notion of a “monadic,” enclosed “self,” opposed to, and
ontologically separate from, “society,” became the
commonsense in the 19
th
 and 20
th
 century West. His answer
is that the notion of an autonomous self, one that can be
abstracted from everyday concerns, and counterposed to an
“objective” external reality, was a necessary concomitant to
the transformation in subjectivity involved in assimilating the
shift from a human-centered, geocentric world-view to a
more rigorous, heliocentric one. This transformation in
subjectivity required, according to Elias, an ability to
transcend immediate impulses and engage in sustained
focus according to collectively established constraints—a
transformation that was part of the development of

“manners” in the Western world, a development that
involved the learning and generational transmission of
parallel restraints on exposing bodily functions, sex, and
violence. The implication of Elias’s argument is that now that
the revolution in science and manners has been brought to
this point, it is possible to turn our attention to
anthropological inquiry and thereby construct a more
socially immersed understanding of the self—an
understanding that his own study has set in motion.
I take Elias to be heralding the emergence of new
“disciplinary order,” in which new modes of sustained
attention, accreted gradually from the monotheistic
revelation through the scientific revolutions in the West, take
a new form in the shared and spread inquiry into human
practices, including that inquiry itself. Elias shows how the
development of manners from the late medieval period on
was itself a kind of discipline, both in the sense that the
proponents of manners sought to instill discipline in the
publics they addressed and in the sense that doing so
demanded a kind of comparative study of habits and the
making explicit of what had been tacit. Even more, the
emergence of manners itself opened new fields of inquiry,
such as that of the “unconscious” and “pedagogy,” insofar
as creating a mannered population introduced the sharp
distinction between childhood and adulthood we now take
for granted and, by generating new layers of indirectness so

as to avoid reference to now forbidden desires, made
invisible, unspeakable and mysterious desires and activities
that had once been completely open. Anthropological
inquiry, in that case, must not only self-reflexively examine
its own disciplinary conditions of possibility but also remain
attentive to the sedimentations of previous processes of
inquiry.
An equally profound implication of Elias’s study is that, once
we have (as Elias is doing) proceeded to broach all that is
entailed by 19
th
 century standards of decency (for Elias the
height of the modes of formality and indirectness he
associates with manners, to be followed by some relaxation
from the mid-20
th
 century on), those standards of decency
and the religious and metaphysical assumptions in which
they have been embedded can no longer be taken for
granted. While asserting a strict neutrality regarding
judgment, Elias shows those standards a respect that more
recent demystifiers like Pierre Bourdieu and Michel Foucault
have not, but the result of turning the taken for granted into
an object of inquiry is ultimately the same. What I will go on
to argue here is that the replacement of those demystified
religious and metaphysical views lies not in whatever cultural
or political revolution or resistance Bourdieu and/or Foucault
(along with many others) might have had in mind, but with
the anthropological inquiry Elias himself foregrounds. It is
possible to make this claim once we realize that the very

social and cultural effect wrought by those metaphysical and
religious beliefs are carried out by this inquiry as well—that
is, the enhancement of “manners,” or the rendering
increasingly distant of violence and the desires that tempt it.
And this argument gains even more power if we follow up on
Peter Sloterdjik’s insistence, in his You Must Change Your
Life, that the great religions and philosophies were
themselves, ultimately, inquiries, and inquiries into the
conditions of possibility of self-transcendence enabled by
disciplinary advances.
A discipline is a space of shared attention, considered as a
space of inquiry. We can thus distinguish it from the moral,
ritual and esthetic modes of shared attention—those that
Eric Gans has rooted in the originary scene. Morality
enforces the equality of all in dividing the object. Ritual
enacts and commemorates the originary scene. Esthetics
involves the oscillation between the sign and object which,
interestingly, seems to refer to something the other on the
scene, rather than the “signifier,” would be doing (in other
words, the one putting forth the sign is not producing the
oscillation). In each case, we could, and, indeed, would have
to, invoke “intuition” or tacit knowing to account for how
“equality” is determined, fidelity to the scene established,
and equipoise between sign and object maintained. At a
certain point, in other words, we would have to say that all
the participants on the scene know that they have all

deferred appropriation because they know, and such
knowledge can only be acquired “emically,” by what Michael
Polanyi calls “indwelling” within the scene.
Now, we can take a step back into the “etic” and say that
each participant is “laying a bet” within a prisoner’s
dilemma-type game. This is a step back into the etic
because the only way someone on the scene could even
begin in frame the situation in this way is if they felt they
were in danger of losing the bet, that is, if the scene was in
danger of collapse. So, the “etic” is really “emic” too, but the
emic in a state of at least potential disarray. The potential for
disarray, though, inheres in every perceived discrepancy
between sign and practice, and every practice must evince
some discrepancy with the sign hallowing it. Within every
scene, then, one could imagine the emergence of
disagreements over the equality of portions, the conformity
of ritual to the scene it iterates or, once esthetic intention
becomes deliberate, how to make the sign an ever more
compelling model of desire and its suspension. In such
cases, or, better, from that aspect, inquiry enters into the
equation. By inquiry, to use and extend Michael Polanyi’s
terms, I mean the direction of attention to something we
have been attending from. One has already, or already begun
to, claim a portion, take up a role in the ritual, or give shape
to a sign; feedback from others on the scene suggests an
extension or curtailment of that claim, a clarification of some

gesture pertinent to the role, a sharpening of the sign in
some respect, is called for. This leads one to recursively
review some tacit element in one’s act—to (using Eric Gans’s
term, in The Origin of Language, describing the extension of
the ostensive gesture to non-sacred objects among the
earliest humans) “lower the threshold of significance.” Such
a review measures the distance between the act carried out
and one to be carried out in greater obedience to the object.
The answer, then, is to be found in directing attention to
some previously unconsidered mode of appearance of the
object, which in turn implies the inexhaustibility of the object
and its resistance to desire. Inquiry enables deferral by
assuming a reality irreducible to desire—there is always more
to see, and new ways of seeing, and therefore new ways of
restructuring one’s actions so as to make the object
accessible in new ways. Scaffolded over ritual, moral and
esthetic actions, then, is at least a minimal study of those
actions—a disciplinary space.
The disciplinary space is an engine of differentiations,
turning the object into a generator of new signs. Determining
which aspect of an object, in its sacral and appropriative
relation to the community, is most worthy of attention (a
determination that creates that aspect and expands the
economy of attention, or lowers the threshold of
significance) creates a minimal marketplace, with the more
distinctive “aspectivalizations” rewarded by the ultimate

currency: attention itself. The marketization process is likely
to be more advanced in the arenas Gans, in Originary
Thinking, assigns to the ethical (involving “productive”
action away from the sacred space), but innovations and a
kind of entrepreneurship take place (however slowly and
imperceptibly) in the sphere of ritual as well. New events,
signaling new crises for communities that are transforming
at whatever speed, need to be incorporated into an existing
institutional structure upon which they will be modeled, and
which those incorporations will transform. That communities
and institutions change in response to new events is
obvious; that some degree of inquiry into the terms of those
communities and institutions accompanies and, indeed,
shapes those changes, is less so; even less obvious is that
such inquiry consists of attending to the tacit as signs of an
inexhaustible object or, as I would prefer to start saying,
“reality,” in Charles Sanders Peirce’s sense of that which is
what it is regardless of what I or anyone else think about it,
or, defined in terms of unending and open ended disciplinary
inquiry, “[t]he opinion that is fated to be ultimately agreed to
by all who investigate,” even should “[o]ur perversity and
that of others indefinitely postpone the settlement of
opinion” (“How to Make Our Ideas Clear,” 133). The object,
that is, becomes inexhaustible insofar as it anchors or
sutures various degrees and modes of meaning through
direct and indirect reference to the central object and the
moral and ritual institutions organized to commemorate it;

and once the object thereby becomes inexhaustible and
irreducible to those moral and ritual institutions, we have
“reality,” and a disciplinary space that opens onto reality. In
other words, disciplinary spaces are always “about”
something that is what it is regardless of what anyone thinks
about it (and, it should be said, regardless of whether it
exists—so, for example, we can explore God’s reality with
complete indifference to any question of God’s existence)
and participants in those spaces accede to the demand that
we never stop thinking about it.
Rather than attempting to devise rules for inquiry, then, it is
more illuminating to follow inquiry along the boundaries it
shares with ritual, morality and esthetics. Ritual is already a
study in desire, its transcendence, and the representation of
that relation between desire and transcendence. Desire is
disruptive insofar as it creates asymmetry in any community;
the means for restoring symmetry must lie both within and
outside of the community; and the restoration of symmetry
must re-name and assimilate the originally disruptive desire
—and all this must be represented in a way intelligible to the
community but also to some extent abstractly, insofar as the
ritual must adumbrate its future narrative renderings and
elaborations. That, at any rate, is how ritual looks from within
a disciplinary space which is only a full disciplinary space to
the extent it sees all forms of human meaning as disciplinary.
Disciplines are likewise concerned with assimilating the

anomalous to the normal practices of the community, and
this will be done all the more effectively to the extent that the
anomalous is displayed fully, in all its disruptive relation to
the existing terms of inquiry.
Disciplines cannot survive without a rigorously applied
egalitarian morality: anyone within the discipline can be
heard as long as they follow the (often tacit) procedures of
the discipline. By the same token, no attention at all need be
paid to anyone outside of the discipline, or, for that matter, to
any question or observation incommensurable with the
discipline(1). The most urgent question for any discipline,
then, is how to determine who belongs inside. As with tribal
or cult membership, inclusion must ultimately involve a
personal dimension: even with our vast educational
apparatuses and impersonal credentialing mechanisms,
someone, and usually at least several someones, who are
already recognized members of the discipline, need to know
you and your work and to vouch for you. And what needs to
be known about you is analogous in each case: you know
how to and are willing to play by the rules. I hope that it is
clear that I am not being critical here; rather, I am asserting
that it must be this way. The equal division of the object on
the originary scene would be a negotiated solution—
strength, aggressiveness, assumptions of merit, and other
forces of inequality will, we can assume, be operative up
until the point that those asserting those privileges do not so

add to the cumulative resentments of the community as to
render the originary sign null and void. But how could one
know when that point is being approached? Even for those
within the community, it will be at best a question of
educated guesses and trial and error—but for outsiders,
negotiating this terrain would be impossible without
extensive training, which is to say without them becoming
insiders. (The process of making outsiders insiders, that is,
pedagogy, is itself the object of a disciplinary space.)
Similarly, the rules of even the most objective scientific
discipline—rules about how to carry out and formalize
procedures, what counts as a violation of procedure, meta-
rules regarding which violations can be repatriated within the
discipline, etc., are a question of further inquiry that both
presupposes and revises the rough equality of the discipline.
The connection between the esthetic and inquiry is perhaps
easiest to see. The spectator’s oscillation between sign and
object might begin as an inchoate impasse between desire
and the restraint formed by fear—a glance towards the
object impels one forward while a glance at the sign compels
a backward step, with the power of the sign then drawing
one’s attention back to the object and so on. But insofar as
the esthetic is to become a deliberate practice (“art” being
its institutionalized recognized form), which is to say the one
forming the sign learns to vary its form, to dial desire and
fear up and down, to introduce new desires for hitherto

undesirable objects, and so on, while the spectator learns to
distinguish between manipulative attempts to intensify
desire and fear from opportunities provided to examine
those emotions, then we already have a space of inquiry. In
fact, the complete separation of art from representations
derived from the ritual-moral realm would leave art with no
objects other than those constructed by the spectator,
listener or reader, which is to make the “recipient” of the
artwork a participant in it. The consequence of this, in turn,
is to abolish art as a separate institution and turn it into an
ongoing disciplinary inquiry of everyday life within everyday
life. The duck/rabbit image that so fascinated Wittgenstein
provides a good model for this—the most minimal work of
esthetic inquiry would simply be to make us see the duck
when we are more likely to see the rabbit, and vice versa.
Remaining within a disciplinary space involves iterating the
originary gesture of converting designations into
constructions of reality. This entails converting given, tacitly
acquired distinctions into constitutive distinctions. For
example, in Durkheim’s analysis of the relation between
legality and criminality, he shows how the distinction
transcends the particular acts one would designate as legal
or illegal at a particular point in time in a particular culture.
Rather, the distinction between legality and criminality is a
permanent one, because the boundary between preferred
and privileged acts, on the one hand, and disfavored acts, on

the others, is permanent: any social order presupposes such
a distinction, just as the very act of attention entails a
preference for one object over another. In that case, even if
by some miracle, individuals stopped murdering, robbing
and raping their fellows, the threshold for unacceptable acts
would simply be lowered, and acts that now fall well below
that threshold, such as mere rudeness, would then fall above
it. This doesn’t necessarily mean that the death penalty or
long prison sentences would then be imposed on the
perpetrators of such acts, but it does mean that whatever
penalties they were to incur would be as socially isolating, in
their own way, as the penalties for those “genuine” crimes
are today. In that case, “crime” is a constitutive element of
social order or, as Durkheim puts it, “a factor in public health,
an integrative element in any society” (98).
The tendency of any discipline is to make the founding
concepts of the discipline reciprocally constitutive: to make
crime a constituent of law abidingness, sickness a
constituent of health, the anomaly a constituent of the
normal, the ugly of the beautiful, the heretical of the sacred,
and so on. The concepts are thereby relativized radically, but
not abolished; in fact, the distinction between them is also
radicalized. For example, that sickness and health are co-
constitutive is self-evident: no one is perfectly healthy,
everyone has the beginnings or the beginnings of the
beginnings of cancer, heart disease, dementia, and myriad

other disorders from birth, and health would more properly
be defined in terms of the so far successful resistance to
and delay of those disorders than their absence. The proper
discipline of medicine, then, would focus on the boundaries
where, with ever greater precision, we can mark the onset of
and neutralization of those disorders. The living being would
be nothing but the totality of those boundaries. Sickness,
then, marks the boundary of the system of life, and also
marks the contingency of that system, while health is life’s
deferral of decline and death. The boundary marking one
system from another marks the limits of the relativization of
the founding concepts, which is also to say that the purpose
of relativization is to enable us to mark that boundary of the
discipline.
The relativizations I have been producing here, between
morality and ethics, and between ritual, morality, esthetics
and inquiry, also serve the purpose of marking the
boundaries of the human community as discovered by and
the disciplinary space constitutive of the originary
hypothesis. To say that ritual, morality and esthetics contain
a constitutive dimension of inquiry, learning and knowing
(and that inquiry, learning and knowing have a ritual
dimension, a morality and esthetics) is not to abolish or
dilute these concepts. What remains is a hierarchy of
boundaries within any activity or space, and hinges that
open one space or activity onto others. There’s no point, for

example, to speaking of the moral function of art if art
doesn’t already have a moral dimension; but if art has a
moral dimension it is not the same moral dimension as
politics or ritual or family life might have, but one predicated
on the creation of a community of those oscillating between
sign and reality in tandem. This might include an oscillation
regarding the moral quality of the work, for example, framed
as follows: what would we see in the work differently were
we to read it as either immoral or moral? Even better:
demonically, depravedly immoral or supremely, sublimely
moral? Who would we imagine to be on the scene opened by
the work in either case, what would be the reality we would
imagine the work to offer access to, and what in the work
provides access to all on its scene or, contrarily, privilege
access for some and preclude it for others? These inquiries
could have an empirical component—what do we know of
the audiences and historical conditions under which the art
was created, the moral transitions prominent at the time, and
so on—but most fundamentally it is a reading of the
possibilities of the work itself and its own gesturing toward
possible audiences, with the empirical inquiries, our
interfacing with other disciplinary spaces, serving to
enhance our sense of its possibilities. Indeed, the “empirical
components”—historical, political, technological and other
issues—are themselves simply markers of the ways other
disciplinary spaces impinge upon the one opened by the
work of art.

If the inquiry already intrinsic to morality, art and ritual results
from the uncertainty also intrinsic to those spheres, then the
growing uncertainty generated by the interaction of different
moralities, esthetic criteria, and sacralities would make that
inquiry an increasingly prominent element. Morality, sacrality
and esthetics would, then, slide towards becoming the
morality, sacrality and esthetics of inquiry. This may or may
not have happened, or be happening—determining that
would be itself the concern of a disciplinary space. But what
we can say is that the alternative, once unavoidable
uncertainty has been introduced, is a world divided between
incommensurable and at least intermittently hostile faiths
and moralities, on the one hand, and a world comprised of
overlapping modes of inquiry, on the other. In this latter case,
no one would need to concede any of his or her faith, insofar
as that faith can generate a distinctive and sustainable mode
of (at least anthropological) inquiry. Nor would those who
commit to the disciplinary world need to denounce those
who remain within more exclusive ritual and moral spaces as
evil or enemies—rather, they would simply be treated as
disciplinary spaces by addressing those aspects of their
self-understanding where they would recognize themselves
in those terms. If necessary, the problem of defending the
disciplinary world against hostility from other ritual and moral
spaces would itself generate new disciplinary spaces. The
disciplinary world is post-moral to the extent that it is post-
mimetic, and it is post-mimetic insofar as its members

enable each other to imitate that dimension of reality they
are jointly attending to, rather than the appropriative desires
of other individuals. The knowledge of mimetic desire
provided by Biblical, classical, modern and, more recently
Girardian theory and GA is paradoxical: on the one hand, this
is knowledge of the constitutive mode of human being; on
the other hand, it is knowledge of the transcendence of this
being, and if mimetic desire can never be abolished, it can
be deferred; if it can be deferred for a split second, it can
later be deferred for a minute, a year, a life time, generations,
ages—and, we can learn to detect ever more minute, implicit
and potential signs of mimetic desire and devise means of
deferring them before they even produce effects. The
contemporary “study” of “micro-aggressions” is, so far, a
study in how to deploy the concept of “micro-aggression” in
institutional skirmishes, but it could certainly be the
foundation of a genuine disciplinary space—everyday
manners, for example, are a veritable petri dish of micro-
aggressions, along with their deferrals. At the same time, we
could never conclusively deny that the perpetual distancing
of mimetic desire is robbing us of forms of tacit knowledge
that might be needed to sustain any social order, including a
disciplinary one; nor that such distancing, which might
require an ever greater reward at the end, is not merely the
accumulation of resentments on an ultimately apocalyptic
scale. These questions will themselves be major generators
of disciplinary spaces within a disciplinary order that can

never entirely disembed from ritual, morality and esthetics,
because any disciplinary space is a scene among scenes.
We can assume that the construction of a disciplinary space
in the sense of a bounded space of inquiry will serve the
same purpose as any scene—that of deferring violence. The
more free and unthreatened by immediate violence a
particular space is, which is to say the more the space itself
generates mimetic desires in a form conducive to their
satisfaction within the space, the more the violence that
space is concerned with deferring is that of the social whole.
As Eric Voegelin argued in his analysis of Plato’s founding of
philosophy, such autonomous disciplines situate themselves
within a social crisis that they undertake to develop and
disseminate the means of deferring. As Voegelin writes:
Philosophy . . . has its origin in the resistance of the soul to
its destruction by society. Philosophy in this sense, as an act
of resistance illuminated by conceptual understanding, has
two functions for Plato. It is first, and most importantly, an
act of salvation for himself and others, in that the evocation
of right order and its reconstitution in his own soul becomes
the substantive center of a new community which, by its
existence, relieves the pressure of the surrounding corrupt
society. (Order and History Vol. 3 123)
It would follow, then, that the notion of discipline in its more
punitive and educational (for example, Foucauldian) senses,

in other words as a rigorous set of practices, guided by
theory and aimed at transforming habits, imposed upon
others, follows from the understanding of a disciplinary
space as recuperative and reparative in the face of social
disorder. In particular, what Foucault understood to be a
“disciplinary society” best makes sense as the emergence, in
the modern era, of new disciplines aimed primarily at
diagnosing and proposing cures for equally novel social ills.
Just as it made sense to Plato that only those “guardians,”
who wished only to explore the good life, could be trusted to
rule over others, so it makes sense that those who
undertook to study, to take a few examples, the moral and
intellectual needs and deficiencies of the burgeoning urban
populations, the theories of punishment and penitential
practices, the health and sanitary living and working
conditions of the new industrial working class, would be
those asked to found modern school systems, reform
prisons and police departments, manage factories and so
on.
In other words, the notion of discipline is one: it is an
extension of the concept of deferral, as the originary
hypothesis understands it: a signifying of desire and
resentment so as to delay the consequences of desire and
resentment and make them conform in expression to the
demands of a sacralized object of desire. A disciplinary
scene is a withdrawal from social disorder and a renewal of

deferral in some exemplary manner, so as to allow reality to
become a means of enhancing self-discipline. Knowledge,
then, is not an effect, reproduction, and legitimation of
unequal power relations. Rather, power follows from that
knowledge marked by the identification, diagnosis, and
proposed amelioration or abolition of some source of social
disorder. Nor is it simply the truthfulness or profundity of the
knowledge on offer—the “clients” and “customers” are
unequipped to judge the result of the discipline on its own
terms, and the success or failure of their public enterprises
can only be judged in an ad hoc manner, since there can be
no “control” group. It is, I would say the “charisma,” in Philip
Rieff’s sense, that is conferred upon those who have
distanced themselves from the immediate, the obvious, the
commonsensical in order to map out a normally invisible set
of relations, that is the source of disciplinary power. While
disciplinary power has in full measure its bullies, its frauds,
its would-be dictators, none of it would be possible without
those who first of all want to know what the truth is, how
society holds together, how the mind works, and so on, or, to
put it more precisely, to direct our attention in a new way
because the old way is frayed and has lost its power of
deferral—indeed, we can only measure the frauds and bullies
against that standard (and against the intrinsic fallibility of
social knowledge, especially the kinds created in response
to pressing needs).

Michael Polanyi, upon whose understanding I have been
drawing, sees inquiry as a concerted convergence of
attention on the articulation of the particulars of a field (from
the particulars to their articulation) of reality in ways that
direct our attention to additional articulable particulars. Such
collaborative spaces rely on the authority of previous and
neighboring inquiries, and draw upon the contributions of
individual inquirers, each of whom, in his/her very attempt to
articulate the particulars thereby presupposes the existence
of a broader, unseen, largely intuited reality. These inquiries
rely upon the “principle of mutual control” (72) to sustain the
shared attention comprising the discipline. In this way, an
acceptance of authority and a restricted, even minute, field
in which one makes responsible choices is combined with an
intimation of a hierarchical and open-ended whole in which
all the overlapping disciplines participate. While focusing on
the natural scientists, Polanyi suggests that all fields of
inquiry, including moral and esthetic, are governed in their
internal and external interactions by the same logic. Polanyi
calls a free and open social order predicated upon these
disciplines a “society of explorers.” While Polanyi does not
push his argument this far, I will now go on to argue that
Polanyi’s society of explorers can encompass society as
such—there are nothing but disciplines (a family constitutes
a—or several—disciplinary spaces, as does a friendship,
even a single meeting between strangers, and so on), and if
all of these disciplines do not recognize each other, that is

because they have not yet (and maybe never will be)
brought into a relation of mutual control with each other.
The internal marketplace of the discipline produces results
made available on the external market to those outside of
the discipline. One doesn’t need to understand a new
medicine, or to know whether it could have been done better
or cheaper, to be cured by it. But one discipline generates
new ones: one, let’s say the medical discipline, takes the
curative property of the medicine on the authority of the
disciplinary space within the pharmaceutical industry, but
disciplines emerge that check that authority, interposing
their own: those who test the medicine, those from the
agency regulating it, or those “lay” agencies that monitor the
medical profession and pharmaceutical industry. The
producing side also generates new disciplines: a discipline of
marketing, and a discipline of finance, to determine how
research funds are to be acquired and allocated, and these
disciplines in their own way overlap with the biological
disciplines inventing the new medicines: certain problems of
marketing will impinge upon the problems specific to
biology. So, while the discipline of biology might seem
distant from any social crisis and need for withdrawal and
restoration, it is brought into proximity to such concerns by
various disciplines dealing directly with urgent needs of
private and social welfare, and which operate in mutual
control with biology. (It also follows that inquiries into the

moral and ethical implications of scientific innovations need
to take this broader field of disciplines into account.)
Assuming a disciplinary order would lead us to frame
discussions of the market in terms of overlapping disciplines:
the shared space of interest and inquiry comes first,
analytically, insofar as we see the final consumer as a
participant in a discipline as well, one who at a very minimum
distinguishes one product from another, and could have their
attention redirected by means that can themselves be
attended to and revised. Not all disciplines are equal—the
individual trying to decide which medicine to take does not
have the resources or knowledge of the chemical, biological
and medical disciplines, and the mutual control disciplines
exercise upon each other reflect these asymmetries (the
medical profession can certainly subject “alternative
medicines” to a kind of sustained, coherent and transparent
scrutiny that could not be reciprocated) but this doesn’t
change the fact that even a fringe, conspiracy theory-laden
“alternative” discipline operates according to rules and
generates shareable observations that would not have been
available otherwise. The task of sorting out the relations
between all these disciplines is itself a disciplinary one, in
part a kind of expertise in debunking.
Jane Jacobs’ analysis of the emergence of new work within
an economy in her The Economy of Cities not only illustrates

the disciplinary processes that make up the market but
further suggests the interdependence of innovative thinking
within the market and more theoretical reflection. Jacobs
studies and categorizes a whole series of ways in which new
work is added to an economic process—to take her first and
simplest example, she mentions Ida Rosenthal, a custom
seamstress who invented the bra by first using this new
undergarment to improve the fit of the dresses she made for
customers. Rosenthal then “became more interested in
making brassieres than in making dresses” (51) and went
into business manufacturing them; “bra-making now stood
as an activity in its own right.” From attending from the
undergarments to their effect on the dress, this particular
undergarment became a focus of attention in its own right.
Jacobs goes on to observe that “[o]nce one gets the hang of
the process [i.e., of how new work is added to old] it is not
only entertaining to track down the progressions of D [old
division of labor] and A [added work] that have given us
modern activities like magnetic-tape manufacturing, but also
to speculate about the about the unknown progressions in
the past” (57) which, as Jacobs goes on to remind her
reader, she has just done in the previous chapter in
advancing the startling thesis that urban life had in fact
preceded rural life. (In brief, Jacobs focuses on the likelihood
that nomads and hunters and gatherers would store their
animals and grain; this storage would become “new work”

that would lead to breeding animals, selling grain and so on,
leading to a market around which a city would develop and
upon which emergent surrounding rural areas would depend.
Interestingly, new work invariably emerges out of some kind
of delay in completing the old work.) In other words,
analyzing the processes of new work leads to iteration of
that new work in the theoretical sphere, generating
hypotheses of origins real and possible. Insofar as any
phenomenon must iterate in some distanced way the
originary event, the analysis of any phenomenon into its
constitutive elements and their categorical constitution must
take an originary turn into the event responsible for the
emergence of the categories.
The same analysis of all institutions as disciplinary spaces
applies to institutions apparently distant from inquiry
understood narrowly, such as political and military ones: first
of all, there are those whose “new work” is to identify the
possibility of preparing for certain internal and external
threats, who study how to do so, including which capabilities
and dispositions are best suited to this purpose, who winnow
out those who are unfit to serve that function, and who offer
up their services. In that case, we could see the full blown
modern state as an articulation of disciplines, first of all
subordinated to the discipline of maintaining social order,
but, increasingly, characterized by ambiguous and shifting
relations between various regulatory, police, and therapeutic

disciplines.
Undesirable, disreputable and even evil activities might have
a disciplinary component (as will virtually any human
activity) but an understanding of disciplinarity makes clear
their limits. So, for example, if we go to war, there is the
possibility of entering a disciplinary space with one’s enemy
—a disciplinary space organized around various reciprocities
regarding proportionate response and other legal issues, the
use of specified weapons, treatment of prisoners, diplomatic
engagements aimed at ending the war, and so on. The
police, in their relation to criminals and other disciplines such
as the judicial and penitential, ultimately invite the criminal to
enter the discipline of policing, both by informing on their
confederates and policing or disciplining themselves as they
become law-abiding citizens. A criminal gang, to a certain
extent, can be a discipline—figuring out how to rob a bank or
claim the turf of a rival gang certainly involves a kind of
inquiry (this is why movies and other forms of entertainment
are able to engage our sympathies on the side of criminals).
But only to a certain extent—the discipline cannot be an
open one, which is to say it cannot submit itself to mutual
control with other disciplines. Since it is predicated upon
subversion of other disciplines, it must therefore conceal
itself, and it must therefore privilege the loyalty of its
members over their commitment to the inquiry; in privileging
loyalty, the criminal gang is necessarily hierarchical, since

someone must enforce loyalty and the loyalty of all to that
enforcer must exceed his towards any of them.
Evil, then, can be known by the way it resists overlapping
with neighboring disciplines: the teacher can want the
student to become a fellow teacher, the doctor can want the
patient to take control of his own health, the policeman can
even want the criminal to not only go straight but become a
model of reformed law-abiding leadership in his community
—but a mugger cannot want his victims to mug him in return
or compete with him for victims, a swindler cannot hope to
have his victims join in his swindle (although an interesting
mode of esthetic representation does test out these
possibilities—for example, among child molesters—of victims
being recruited into the criminal “project,” but part of the
interest in such representations is in the limitations they
reveal: maybe one, even a few victims can be recruited, but
their must always remain a larger pool of potential victims
who will never be admitted); and, at the extreme, the Nazi
cannot want the Jew to join him in his study of the most
expeditious way of exterminating unwanted racial groups.
If one accepts the model presented thus far of post-ritual
social orders as comprised of overlapping and neighboring
disciplines interrelated through mutual control, it follows that
the real antagonist to disciplinary power comes from within.
The modern discipline emerges within a market order, which

itself becomes possible once the secrecy of the cult is
progressively eroded and its inscrutable rites are replaced by
practices of inquiry that can be learned and results that can
be inspected. Even the former cults come to abide by these
rules. The modern discipline, that is, is accountable to
scrutiny from other disciplines regarding its practices and
products, and accountability means bureaucracy, in the
broadest sense of treating reality as always already a grid.
David Olson, in his Psychological Theory and Education
Reform: How School Remakes Mind and Society, shows how
modern disciplines entail modern bureaucracies run by and
for a literate population—indeed, modern literacy is
essentially equivalent to familiarity with the workings and
demands of bureaucracies, and the educational system is
set up so as to produce those who can run them. Even more,
we are all bureaucrats—the reason why teachers hate
grading so much is that it is the most explicitly bureaucratic
of our tasks, where we are most obviously doing nothing
more than sorting students so as to determine their location
in their next step on the bureaucratic ladder. As Olson
argues,
In a modern bureaucratic world, knowledge, virtue and ability
take on a new form. Institutions such as science preempt
knowledge, justice systems preempt virtue, and functional
roles preempt general cognitive ability. Thus, ability,
knowledge and virtue are construed and pursued less in the

form of private mental states and moral traits of individuals
than in the form of competence in the roles, norms, and rules
of the formal bureaucratic institutions in which they live and
work. (288)
These value transformations result from the accountability of
the discipline, or its self-representation before a public,
which is to say other disciplines. The discipline adapts itself
to and shapes the other disciplines so as to ensure the value
of its services to them. Intrinsic interest must be translated
into extrinsic benefits, potential beneficiaries and the
benefits to them must be categorized, itemized, maximized
and institutionalized, and the qualifications for entry into and
continued participation in the discipline formalized. This
accountability can generate more disciplinary spaces, but
insofar as these means of normalization involve the collusion
between established disciplinary spaces to interfere with
emergent disciplinary spaces, the extrinsic readily supplants
the intrinsic: procedures of approval through the application
of established categories replace exploration of the
possibilities of founding concepts, and issuing credentials
substitutes for the ongoing, interested judgment of
participants’ contributions. And struggles can then be
waged over the revision of categories and the updating of
credentials. Each disciplinary space tends to re-organize
itself on the model of others upon which it is dependent, to
that extent replacing inquiry with prefabricated criteria.

Disciplines, then, in order to survive, must become spaces
carved out of and in resistance to the very bureaucracies
they have secreted.
Understanding the emergence of the bureaucratic out of the
disciplinary and disciplinary resistance to bureaucratization
requires that we relativize this boundary between the
bureaucratic and the disciplinary. In the most basic sense,
there is nothing but disciplinarity: disciplinarity is co-
extensive with the human: the originary scene was a
discipline, even if that cannot be recognized until a critical
mass of overlapping disciplines has emerged. Disciplinary
attention, though, can be directed toward the means of
preventing infiltration by other disciplinary spaces: this itself
is a rich field of inquiry. Any disciplinary space can be
threatened by competitors or those who see it as a threat;
self-defense requires the assumption that the actually
existing disciplinary space is the only possible instantiation
of that mode of inquiry, prompting inquiry into the possibility
of the impenetrability of the disciplinary space: so the inquiry
into the human that lies at the origin of, say, a revolutionary
movement is transformed into an inquiry into rooting out
traitors to the revolution (in particular, the best hidden ones)
and ultimately, perhaps, into the possibility of maintaining
the barest remnants, even memories, of what was once a
global movement. It is inquiry all the way up and down, but
what has been refused bureaucratically is the reciprocity

with other disciplines, which really means the desire for and
encouragement of disciplinary spaces to complement and
join one’s own and hence the narrowing rather than
expansion of reality. Still, despite the vanishing possibilities,
one cannot exclude altogether the possibility that the tiniest
space does have, and has been defending against great
odds, the truth that will win out in the long run, which is to
say will outlive and draw the attention of other disciplinary
spaces. Bureaucracy is the study of the means of ensuring
the impermeability of the disciplinary space, of making sure
that what is discovered is intelligible in terms of what is
already known, but that itself may only be known from within
another disciplinary space that through its own
bureaucratization mistakes a harnessing of resources to
sustain a beleaguered truth for dogmatism and paranoia.
It is only through the creation of new disciplinary spaces that
the distinction between discipline and bureaucracy can be
determined. Indeed, modern esthetic developments, or at
least one prominent line of them, can be seen in a new light
once we consider them in terms of the dialectic of discipline
and bureaucracy, and those developments can shed light on
that dialectic. The para-science, “‘pataphysics,” invented by
the 19
th
 century French playwright and novelist Alfred Jarry
as “the science of imaginary solutions and the laws
governing exceptions,” and the font of a wide range of 20
th
century artistic movements, including surrealism, the Oulipo,

and conceptual art, responds, I would suggest, to the
emergence and proliferation of bureaucratic discourse and
the normalization processes they have been bound up with
since the 19
th
 century. The way in which practitioners of
‘pataphysics exploit the reversibility of scientific and other
authoritative modernizing discourses can be seen in Rene
Daumal’s parody/extension of the scientific revolution
introduced by quantum physics:
The impartial observer of modern science will seize this
opportunity to point out that modern science is, despite the
unanimous belief of its friends and its enemies, an
immaterialist science. I might add that for an impartial
observer, a non-materialist science is no more absurd than a
pacifist arms merchant or a vegetarian butcher. Modern
science is based in the belief that thought, ideas and
numbers are immaterial. And so to make a phenomenon
conceivable, knowable, measurable, it deems it necessary to
purge it of all materiality; and even the intractable residue
left untouched by that reduction that could have been taken
as the sign of the existence of some matter is an irreducible
abstract, a mathematical indetermination. What’s more,
thanks to the Probabilities, the unintelligibility of the
unintelligible has become intelligible. (80-1)
Just as, according to Olson, capacities and virtues become
roles and rules within systems, a pacifist can take on the role

of the arms merchant, the vegetarian that of the butcher,
and this anomaly, only absurd for the bureaucratic observer,
makes it possible to imagine that science has itself become
the very thing it would set itself against—the immaterial;
meanwhile, the very unintelligibility this paradox seems to
drive us into becomes, through further advances in
disciplinary inquiry, intelligible. ‘Pataphysics, as the study of
“laws governing exceptions,” inhabits the anomalies of
disciplinary/bureaucratic discourse, deconstructing the
bureaucratization of language by returning to their
constitutive condition the distinctions whose primacy
bureaucracy makes synonymous with its own authority.
“The laws governing exceptions” makes sense in the light of
the retrieval of the disciplinary out of the bureaucratic.
Exceptions to, or anomalies of, bureaucratic rule, are the
forms taken by disciplinary work: the “law governing” such
work is the constitutive boundary between the disciplinary
and the bureaucratic—the boundary between “virtue” and
“norm,” for example. It might be further revealing to consider
corporate, consumer and celebrity culture as a form of
bureaucratic culture, insofar as political coercion, involving
collusion between the security discipline (the state) and
other disciplinary spaces in the market (and, secondarily,
among those other spaces) raises barriers of entry to
disciplinary spaces on the margins of the market. The
resulting publicly inflected private entities study carefully

how to ensure their impermeability by those emergent
spaces. Consumption is in this way engineered and
channeled and asymmetries that emerge in the market are
converted into packaged and permanent icons (“celebrity” is
a result of studies of iconization of contingent markers of
desire). Resistance to consumerism and celebritization
follows, but in what does this resistance consist if not in the
semiotic resources any mode of deferral requires, in this
case the discipline of what Tony Veale calls “educated
insolence” that turns stereotyped (i.e., bureaucratic)
language against itself and facilitates consumer power at
least as effectively as the various serious consumerist
disciplinary spaces, such as Consumer Reports? Without
such power, the discipline of the consumer is at the mercy of
the addictive power of any relatively monopolized product
that targets desires in their more isolated, simplified,
amplified and repeatable forms. While categorizing the
workings of an albeit corporatized free market similarly to
the more recognizable bureaucratic labyrinths such as, say,
the IRS, may seem counter-intuitive, and while the pluralism
of one differs considerably from the near-totalitarianism of
the other, what the two share is the imperative (one that
intensifies as it is obeyed) to make predictability and
controllability ever more perfect at the expense of the
anomalies and innovations that occur at the margins; to put
it more theoretically, they both try to increase the probability
of intended consequences to the point where such

probability is decreased due to excessive interference and
consequent uncertainty in the variables. The difference is
where they lie on the continuum leading from disciplinarity to
bureaucracy.
We can describe the kind of ‘pata-inquiry I am assigning to
disciplinarity more precisely. Let’s grant that any social
activity is rule-governed, at least tacitly. Under normal
conditions, all players make moves corresponding to the
shared rules. Abnormal conditions emerge not so much
when one or more players cheat (cheating, like crime, is
recognized and accounted for within the game) but when
one or more of them leverages an anomaly within the rules.
Broad social rules like “treat everyone equally” are replete
with such anomalies, which have comprised the substance
of politics for the past couple of centuries. Local
bureaucratic rules are as well—the interpretation of any rule
always depends upon a shared good will or faith in one
another’s adherence to some common understanding of the
rules (that is, a disciplinary space committed to studying the
forms and implications of the rules). When such leveragings
occur, one possible response is to restate and seek to
enforce the rules precluding them—but, since what has
occurred is a re-constitution of the rules, the solid ground on
which such reinforcement could take place no longer exists.
The ‘pata response would be to treat the anomaly as the
legitimate rule and invent and enact (leverage) a

complementary anomaly to it. The ultimate purpose of such
counter-leveraging is to restore a new rule-governed setting
that has incorporated the anomalies on all sides, even if the
business (or discipline) of ‘pataphysics (denormalizing
inquiry) is interested only in the creation of the
complementary anomaly—another disciplinary space would
have to take on the task of resettling the field that
‘pataphysics unsettles.
Disciplinary thinking, located on the boundary between the
disciplinary and the bureaucratic, directs our attention,
simultaneously, to the bureaucratic as seen by the
disciplinary and the disciplinary as seen by the bureaucratic.
Ta ke   t h e   fo l l o w i n g   m o c k   d e s c r i p t i o n   o f   a   P h D   t h e s i s   b y   B a r t
Plantenga in his novel, Spermatagonia: The Isle of Man:
During the course of my PhD I began to gravitate towards
the Muzak-like qualities of laughter, beneficial sound that
reflects society positively, confirms its values of family, work,
religion, freedom within the parameters of consumerism.
I studied laughter’s coercive (cooptative) laughtrack
strategies; how they trained people to laugh on certain cues
and quips. Keep the funny bone sufficiently activated with no
time to think. Its infectious laughter managing to obliterate
the fact that these banal attempts at humor always failed.
The laughtrack took up the slack. It has us laughing at things
that are not funny. Put a laughtrack over a documentary of

the Nazi Death Camps and people can be made to laugh. I
know, I did the study, which was published in the Journal of
Mass Psychiatry, vol. 16, no. 3. Took segments of Alain
Resnais’ Night & Fog... and added some laughtrack I lifted
from a failed sitcom. It was there, I have it on tape—
cognitive, chuckling dissonance, man. Involuntary laughter,
involuntary manslaughter—NOT totally opposing ideas. (12-
13)
Plantenga here brings out the inseparability of genuine
inquiry and its bureaucratic deformation into a means of
manipulation: laughtracks are there for a reason, and it would
indeed be very interesting to explore the precise mechanics
of the laughtrack and of different laughtracks—the particular
form of laughter each induces, its effects on the viewer’s
judgment of what is being viewed, and so on; such an inquiry
would further turn into an inquiry into laughter itself. What,
though, would distinguish this inquiry from service in the
attempt to make laughtracks more effective, which is to say,
to use the laughtrack to sidetrack inquiries into a range of
possible responses to, say, a film on the Holocaust? Singling
out the “involuntary” common to laughter and manslaughter
marks the capability of the disciplinary self to attend to the
implication of its own deliberately undertaken and initially
free disciplinary inquiry into the involuntary behavior of the
bureaucratically managed subject. Plantenga’s invocation of
the Nazi death camps marks the moral inversion of the

discipline into the bureaucracy, but the broader immorality
he points to is the simulation of laughter in the hope that it
will be contagious, and produce subjects who laugh when
required—regardless of whether what is laughed at is funny.
The disciplinary becomes bureaucratic when one no longer
studies being funny, but rather supplants humor with a
technological mechanism that will produce the effects of
humor (laughter) sufficiently to maintain the audience
needed for other, commercial purposes. Inquiry is required
to invent and regulate that technological mechanism, but
once it is controlled by the feedback from measurable
effects (the regularized relation between laughter and
ratings) not only has the discipline of comedy been
displaced but so, also, has the disciplinary inquiry into
various forms of inducing laughter.
We could imagine this distinction as follows: the audience
could enter the discipline initiated by the comic by trying to
figure out what makes a joke or routine funny, using it as a
model for a joke or routine of one’s own, or noticing for the
first time the breakdown in automaticity referenced by the
joke; one could not enter into the study of one’s involuntary
responses to a mechanism without disavowing and
ultimately repudiating those responses. A broader
implication for a specifically bureaucratic mode of thought
follows. For the disciplinary inquirer, the contributions one
enables others to make to the disciplinary space constitute

one’s relation to others, to an audience which is implicitly
invited into the disciplinary space; once one begins to study
how to generate similar or analogous responses to those
previously elicited, one institutes an impermeable boundary
between inquirer and audience. I could show others how to
construct a fictional scene that elicits a kind of canned
laughter on the part of a “typical” audience (you can make
people laugh by doing injury to a character who has already
been “softened up” as a target, for example), but once you
have shown them how it’s done they will no longer find it
funny—they are now with you, targeting others or, more
precisely, feeding their addiction (addiction being nothing
more than an uncontrolled desire for the exact experience
one is already familiar with). The articulation of inquiry and
bureaucracy enables us to account for Heidegger’s framing
“technology,” or the “sleepwalking” McLuhan associates with
immersion in a new medium, in which references and
gestures enabled by a new relation to nature and the world
are, unknown to those making the references and gestures,
really references to the new mode of human organization
constitutive of the relation to world and nature. The
accumulation of mediations amongst humans and between
humans and their objects of desire are both means and
results of inquiry, which is to say of constitutive deferral and
disciplines, and grids representing a “particle-ized” and
already “gridded” human-in-nature. The bureaucratic mind
wishes to be on an abstracted scene that the sign has

always already completely mapped, down to the least
possible gesture. What an originary account can add to
those Heidegger and McLuhan is the location of
“bureaucracy” on the originary scene, where the reciprocal
“calibration” of their respective signings on the part of the
scene’s participants involves a potentially total mapping of
possible responses and respective mappings of self and
others. The approach to that totality in the originary event
closes the scene while leaving sufficient margin for error to
notice further residues of representable desire. Bureaucracy
seeks to eliminate that margin of error by ensuring the
recipient fits the delivery and designing the delivery to match
the prepared recipient.
Olson, as I suggested earlier, associates the emergence of
bureaucratic culture with the spread of literacy. Olson and
others have done extensive work on the transformations
wrought by literacy on individual and collective
consciousness, but rather than going over that terrain here, I
will argue, more specifically, for viewing disciplinary thinking
as a specific form of thinking within literate modes of
thought but also within the aporias of those modes of
thought.
Olson’s theory of writing in The World on Paper advances
beyond the pathbreaking work of Eric Havelock and others
by reversing the relation between syntactic writing (writing

that distinguishes, at least, between words within a
sentence) and speech—rather than assuming that writing
was an attempt to represent speech (that is, that the
inventors of writing already saw language in terms of
individual words and sentences which they then sought to
represent), Olson argues that syntactic representation,
coming from the emblems or tokens used to record
inventory (so, the first syntactical writing comes when it
becomes possible to write “3 goats” instead of “goat goat
goat”), itself provides the model for language that writing
proceeds to institutionalize:
Once a writing system has a syntax, the emblems or tokens
can now be seen as words rather than as emblems and the
constructions can be seen as a proposition rather than a list.
The structures present in the script now provide the
categories needed for introspecting the implicit structures of
language. Such scripts are logographic in that the tokens
now represent the major grammatical constituents of the
language, namely, words. But, to repeat, it does not follow
that the inventors of such a script already knew about words
and then sought to represent them in the script. The
opposite may be true. The scribal inventions dictated a kind
of reading which allowed language to be seen as composed
of words related by means of a syntax. Writing thereby
provides the model for the production of speech (in reading)
and for the introspective awareness of speech as composed

of grammatical constituents, namely, words. (77, emphasis
Olson’s)
While the “invention” of the declarative sentence certainly
precedes that of writing by many millennia, it is with the
invention of writing that the declarative sentence can be
singled out as such and treated as the primary linguistic
form, the model for language as such. So, the development
of alphabetic writing coincided with the development of
metaphysics in Greece and monotheism in Israel—both are
new modes of intelligibility predicated upon the primacy of
the declarative sentence. As Olson points out, the
understanding that words represent meanings rather than
being embodied in the things they refer to “spells the death
of ‘word’ magic or more precisely, ‘name’ magic” (75). It now
becomes possible to argue about what “good” or “God”
“really means”—it has some stable meaning, insofar as its
permanence is evident in its written form, but it has no
obvious or direct connection to any particular meaning.
Once language can be broken down into words and
sentences, two things happen: first, specific words and
sentences can be preserved in an exact form, and that
preservation can be insisted upon. That is, verbal
commonplaces, formulas, ritual expressions, sacralized
claims, inherited maxims, and so on, have an “original” and
“authentic” form against which future iterations can be

measured. Second, the verbal elements of sentences can be
broken down, replaced, combined and rearranged
deliberately, and for intended effects. (As has been noted
many times, the first industrialized, mass production process
was the printing press.) No doubt, oral communities must
have insisted upon continuity and varied their uses of
linguistic forms, but with the existence of an original form,
new modes of thought and discourse, such as the
distinctions between orthodoxy and heresy and word and
intention, commentary, hermeneutical and allegorical
reading strategies, grammatical, logical and other kinds of
“correctness,” parody and so on become possible. The
possibility of iterating a specific linguistic form leads
simultaneously towards reverence and mockery, or, for that
matter, simple dispersal, with the provenance and attitude to
be adopted toward the sentence left open. And these
consequences of the ability to manipulate language
introduced by writing—to pulverize and recombine it—are
further intensified, as McLuhan noted, in the wake of the
printing revolution in the early modern world.
I now propose processing this intellectual development
through a distinction Michael Tomasello makes in his recent
book, A Natural History of Human Thinking, between “joint
intentionality” and “collective intentionality.” Joint
intentionality, for Tomasello, is the distinguishing marker of
human thinking, represented by the gesture of pointing—

when someone points something out to another, both know
that they are looking at the “same” thing, and each knows
that the other knows. In evolutionary terms, Tomasello
associates the period of “joint intentionality” with the iconic
signs (comprised of pointing and mimicry) constitutive of the
earliest period of human language. Eventually, these iconic
signs become more abstract—due both to the increase in
the size of human communities and the grammaticalization
of gestures (that is, their articulation into relations between
signs, and ultimately sentences), until we get to the point of
the “arbitrary” sign with no necessary connection to its
meaning or referent. At this point, words have taken on
meanings independent of any instance of their use, and
rather than simply being able to understand another’s mind
we are able and, indeed, compelled, to conform to the edicts
of the “objectivity” comprising a “collective intentionality.”
Now, the emergence of collective intentionality certainly, like
the declarative sentence, precedes the development of
writing—I am arguing not for the simultaneity of these
developments, but for the claim that the later developments
seized upon, accentuated, and exaggerated within language
use the earlier developments: “collective intentionality”
would have intensified the focus on the declarative
sentence, and writing would have further intensified
collective intentionality, marginalizing along the way earlier,
iconic, modes of language. Singling out the declarative

sentence as the primary linguistic unit would lead analysts to
filter out everything in such utterances that are not specific
to them—directing attention to the speaker, for example, or
the audience, would minimize the differentiation of the
declarative sentence from other speech acts, such as
imperatives or promises. What is specific to the declarative
sentence is the constitutive claim that words match reality in
some way that anyone who hears the sentence could
identify (and assess). In that case, the ideal declarative
sentence is one that could be uttered felicitously by anyone,
anywhere, at any time. And this is indeed the ideal for
Western metaphysics and, however differently, Judaic
monotheism, the name of whose God is, essentially, I am
everywhere, always and no one (although it’s worth noting
that the ideal sentence is simultaneously and paradoxically
cancelled in the Jewish name of God, since no one could in
fact felicitously say it without claiming to be that God).
The critique of Western metaphysics, shadowing it from the
beginning, but becoming increasingly powerful over the past
century and a half, can, then, be distilled into the following
argument: Western metaphysics, in privileging collective
intentionality as crystallized in the ideal declarative
sentence, has elided the fact that joint intentionally persists
within and, indeed, continues to constitute, collective
intentionality. (Tomasello doesn’t address this issue either,
which is anyway distant from his concerns, but his argument

that children continue to learn language—as how could they
not?—through joint attention can be taken to suggest that
such tension must always exist.) Metaphysics, in answering
the needs of emergent empires consequent upon its
creation of a novel and enduring disciplinary space, thereby
produces a meta-bureaucracy, predicated upon the
imagination of a single world scene of which all other scenes
are components. Joint intentionality persists in the form of
idioms within collective intentionality and, to refer back to my
previous discussion, bureaucratic thinking seeks to eliminate
such idiomatic trace of joint attention while disciplinary
thinking establishes sites of joint attention directed at the
products of collective intentionality. If it is only within
collective intentionality that words take on authoritative
meanings (so that one could be right or wrong about what
they mean), the joint intentionality of disciplinary thinking is
aimed at the incommensurable idioms of which those
meanings are composed (whatever remains anomalous in
collective intentionality). The bureaucratized declarative
strives to eliminate paradox from language, to make every
sentence “clear,” which is to say, refer to a reality that all
readers (participants in an imagined collective intentionality)
of the sentence would realize as that reality and as
decomposable into equally discreet and unanimously
recognized parts. Disciplinary idioms are no less invested in
the declarative sentence, but work to draw out the
generative paradoxicality of any sentence, its constitutive

character for those jointly attending to the boundary
between the possible realities deferred by the sentence and
the reality it presents (like Durkheim’s reference, mentioned
earlier, to crime as a “factor in public health”). Disciplinary
idioms, at their most elemental, see where mockery might be
appropriate where reverence is given, or reverence deserved
where mockery is taken for granted—where, that is, a piece
of signifying material might be iterated differently. In a
bureaucratic age, those disciplinary idioms, or instances of
joint attention toward collective intentionality, are most
readily found in the greatest source of paradox: the
bureaucratic desire to eliminate paradox by intensifying and
enforcing the belonging of each element to its place within
the structure. The simplest way of doing that is by
sensationalizing and demonizing any deviation while
sentimentalizing the rediscovery of the element within its
place.
Disciplines are invariably organized around founding, quasi-
sacred texts (this is true of even the most informal
disciplines, including those founded upon self-help books,
do-it-yourself journals, women’s health websites, etc.)—if
one is to make a claim in the discipline, one must be able to
refer back to such a text and make one’s claim consistent
with it. The implicit claim is that the text represents an
achieved mode of collective intentionality, while one’s own
claim represents an attempt to direct joint attention to

something unsettled within the collective intentionality: more
precisely, if the text is an achieved mode of collective
intentionality, that is because it has achieved a higher level of
discipline compared to some other bureaucratized mode of
thought, and the joint attention directed at it is to preserve
its centrality to the discipline by preventing its
bureaucratization in turn (“one might take K to simply be
saying... but if we look at this passage we can see that he is
really...”). The member of the discipline resists the text’s re-
absorption in the bureaucratic commonplaces it
distinguishes itself from in two ways. First, by continuing the
work of breaking up and reorganizing bureaucratic discourse
initiated by the text: ordinary bureaucratic discourse
transcended disciplinarity, as I suggested earlier, by taking
binary distinctions assumed to reside empirically in the world
(like legality and illegality) and to be further embedded in a
series of other empirically based binaries (moral and
immoral, good and evil, beautiful and ugly, etc.) and treat
them as constitutive—reciprocally definitive and
interdependent. Members of the discipline can continue to
push this work forward, bringing the same binaries into new
terrain, or deconstructing and re-aligning other binaries and
making those binaries co-constitutive with the original ones.
Or, they can go to work on the founding texts themselves,
using their constitutive distinctions to similarly treat what
those texts have taken for granted as merely empirical
distinctions.

About a third of the way through his novel, Plantenga has his
protagonist, after following the disciplinary course of
reducing all human phenomena to their biological, chemical,
physical and hence manipulable constituents and finding, as
result, “I seemed to come undone” (53), embark on a “12-
step Program for Disappearance—survival, after all, requires
a kind of creative disappearance.” The rest of the novel
involves enacting this “program,” which turns out to involve a
perpetual inquiry, with direct consequences, of all the ways
one appears in the contemporary world. The protagonist
Kees removes all brand markers from his possessions and
moves to a non-descript part of the city where life is
something no one takes much notice of; he gradually
withdraws from his connectedness to the media, using it,
where connected, to further regulate his appearance and
inner emotional and physiological responses so as to stand
out less (“[t]he Golf Channel was better for me. Following
the camera’s eye following the ball trained my inner eye to
focus, regulate blood pressure, made me appreciate fairways
and greens as visual equivalents of the tranquil mind” [65]).
He starts putting on black face, because “[b]eing black
meant being nobody” and “I knew white reflected light, thus
calling attention to its source. Let’s just say it was a way of
removing my face as bright orb from competing with other
more worthy celestial bodies” (77). Disappearance involves
not so much hiding away or disguising oneself as someone
else, but an ongoing reciprocal modulation of oneself and

one’s environment, wherein there is always a new threshold
of attention emerging in response to one’s withdrawal of
oneself from the world of attended to objects, which is to
say from mimetic competition:
I began aligning every breath with sounds of external
phenomena—a shout, the DINGLE-DANGLE of the passing
ice cream truck, grumbling 18-wheelers, airplane overhead,
the cicadic car alarms, the clack-clack-clack of late-for-work
high heels. In this way my breath could hitch a furtive ride on
other molecules of sound to ultimately dissolve in some
greater ambience. Like my autobiography written in invisible
ink. (90-1).
Kees’ disciplined disappearance gets taken up by the same
media systems he used to manipulate (and, in another
period of his life, participate more directly in): “his
disappearance had inaugurated a legacy—the more absent,
the more famous” (135), with the novel ending with the
speculations of the crime scene detectives over the actual
cause of his demise and the philosophical and moral
implications of suicide. He himself becomes part of the
scene of discarded objects of contemporary civilization in
which he had immersed himself. This is the end point of the
disciplinary: to leave behind traces of signs of the same
order as those that first drew one’s attention to some act-
become-sign as something that could draw others’

attention. The disciplinary, then, is also the end point of de-
mimeticization: from the direct modeling of each others’
actions in one’s own actions through the transformation of
deferred actions into signs of new scenes of possible
actions, to the becoming a tissue of signs modeling the
possibility of transforming any scene into a sign.
Works Cited
Agamben, Giorgio. The Highest Poverty: Monastic Rules and
Form-of-Life. Translated by Adam Kotsko. Stanford
University Press, 2013.
Daumal, Rene. Pataphysical Essays. Translated by Thomas
Vosteen. Wakefield Press, 2012.
Durkheim, Emile. The Rules of Sociological Method and
Selected Texts. Edited with an Introduction by Steven Lukes.
Translated by W.D. Halls. The Free Press, 1982.
Elias, Norbert. The Civilizing Process: Sociogenetic and
Psychogenetic Investigations. Translated by Edmund
Jephcott. Blackwell, 1994.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the
Prison. Translated by Alan Sheridan. Vintage, 1995.
Gans, Eric. Originary Thinking: Elements of Generative
Anthropology. Standford University Press, 1993.

⸻-. The Origin of Language: A Formal Theory of
Representation. University of California Press, 1981.
Jacobs, Jane. The Economy of Cities. Random House, 1970.
Jarry, Alfred. Selected Works. Edited by Roger Shattuck and
Simon Watson Taylor. Grove Press, 1965.
McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy. Signet, 1969.
Olson, David. Psychological Theory and Educational Reform:
How School Remakes Mind and Society. Cambridge
University Press, 2003.
⸻-. The World on Paper: The Conceptual and Cognitive
Implications of Writing and Reading. Cambridge University
Press, 1994.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. Selected Writings (Values in a
Universe of Chance). Edited with an Introduction and Notes
by Philip P. Weiner. Dover, 1958.
Plantenga, Bart. Spermatogonia, The Isle of Man.
Autonomedia, 2004.
Polanyi, Michael. The Tacit Dimension. Doubleday & Co.,
1967.
Rieff, Philip. Charisma: The Gift of Grace, and How It Has
Been Taken From Us. Pantheon, 2007.

Sloterdijk, Peter. You Must Change Your Life. Polity, 2013.
Sukenick, Ronald. Narralogues: Truth in Fiction. SUNY Press,
2000.
To m a s e l l o ,   M i c h a e l .  A Natural History of Human Thinking.
Harvard University Press, 2014.
Veale, Tony. Exploding the Creativity Myth: The
Computational Foundations of Linguistic Creativity.
Bloomsbury Academic, 2012.
Voegelin, Eric. Order and History (Volume 3): Plato and
Aristotle. (Collected Works of Eric Voegelin, Volume 16.)
University of Missouri Press, 1999.
Notes
1. Polanyi tells of an essay published in the Proceedings of
the Royal Society in 1947:
It described some fairly simple experiments which
proved, in the author’s opinion, that a hydrogen atom
impinging on a metal wire could transmit to it energies
ranging up to a hundred electron volts. Such an
observation, if correct, would be far more revolutionary
than the discovery of atomic fission by Otto Hahn in
1939. Yet when this paper appeared and I asked various
physicists’ opinions about it, they only shrugged their

shoulders. They could not find fault with the experiment,
yet they not only did not believe its results, but did not
even think it worth while to consider what was wrong with
it, let alone check up on it. They just ignored it. About ten
years later some experiments were brought to my notice
which accidentally offered an explanation of Lord
Rayleigh’s findings. His results were apparently due to
some hidden factors of no great interest, but which he
could have hardly identified at the time. He should have
ignored his observation, for he ought to have known that
there must be something wrong with it. (65)
This intuitive sense that some claim just can’t be right
regardless of whether or not one knows why is constitutive
of any disciplinary space. (back)