

The Linguistic Turn and
Generative Literacy
Adam Katz
Abstract:
This essay argues that only generative anthropology can
complete the “linguistic turn” that has dominated much of
20
th
 century thought. Completing the linguistic turn is
essential because the metalanguages of humanism and
metaphysics obscure the forms of authority needed to
ensure intelligent participation in institutions and hierarchical
orders. The need to accept a “given” centrality in order to
clarify authoritative orders is the reason why victimary anti-
metaphysical discourses could only generate resentment
towards, but not transcend, metaphysics. Generative
anthropology, meanwhile, not only accepts the givenness of
the center, but sees the center as the guarantee of meaning
and human order. Replacing metalanguages with
“infralanguages” enables us to remain aware of ourselves as
beings within language as a way of clarifying our reciprocal
relations to each other.
Keywords: generative anthropology; linguistic turn;
infralanguage; metalanguage; inscription; natural semantic
primes; metaphysics; the center

I’m going to begin with the assumption that the linguistic
turn entails the rejection of any attempt to find legitimation
for what we say in language in some reality taken to be
outside of language, whether this outside be truth, nature,
human nature, reality, any form of interiority, the greater
good, or anything else. This means that language, rather
than being primarily representational, that is, trying to
provide an adequate and therefore legitimating picture of
what is outside of language, is generative—that is, it is
relationships intrinsic to representational structures that
create what we call truth, reality, nature, the good and so on.
To   s a y   t h a t   l a n g u a g e   i s   g e n e r a t i v e   i s   t o   s a y   t h a t   t h e
meanings of signs are to be found in their effects on other
signs, not in reference to reality: the main question, then,
becomes, what are the levers or mechanisms within sign
systems that make such effects possible? To put it in
pragmatic terms, to take the example of argumentation,
instead of trying to prove that your discourse represents
reality better, the question is how to enter existing
discourses in such a way as to modify and eventually
become them.
Anna Wierzbicka’s discussion of modern English in her
Experience, Evidence and Sense: The Cultural Legacy of
English (2010) provides us with an example of what entering
and inhabiting existing discourses means: she shows how

the entire language was transformed as a result of one
intervention: Locke’s theory of knowledge and politics. She
traces a whole series of terms, such as “experience,”
evidence,” “empirical,” “sense,” and others back to Locke’s
usages,[1] and points out not only the historical contingency
and cultural specificity of these terms, but that these are
among the very words English speakers take to be most
universal and commonsensical. It’s no coincidence that
these are the words with which we take ourselves to be
describing our access to what lies outside of language.  It
lies outside of Wierzbicka’s inquiry to explain how these
words operated generatively upon the English language, but
I would suggest that raising and answering that kind of
question is, in the wake of the linguistic turn, central to any
aesthetic, moral, ethical or political inquiry. It may very well
be all such an inquiry entails.
The generativity of language, at least in the post-
structuralist forms given it by Derrida’s claim that there is no
outside of the text or Rorty’s (1979) injunction to “keep the
conversation going” (378), is generally taken to be a pluralist
doctrine in which the difference inhabiting the sign is
irreducible. But the sign that constitutes the originary scene
is absolutely generative, insofar as the sign creates the
scene and the human, while at the same time presupposing
complete unanimity. And, in fact, I think that the linguistic
turn, understood through originary thinking, poses a very

different kind of problem, to which we can, in fact, reduce all
human problems: that of ensuring that all participants on a
scene issue, and know themselves to be issuing, the same
sign. This is a problem because it never really is the same
sign (the linguistic turners are right about that)—since signs
only take on meaning within a scene, a sign on one scene
cannot be identical to a sign on another scene, no matter
what measures we take or what rules we construct to ensure
the sign will be recognized as identical—indeed, we take
such measures and construct such rules precisely because
there is no internal essence of the sign (or some reality it
presumably refers to) that makes it the same.
There are two ways in which the identity of the sign can be
established. One, all participants on a scene can agree that
the sign is the same according to some agreed upon criteria
for identity—in other words, some metalanguage, which will
then have to be grounded in a metaphysical reality outside of
language. Or, we can establish the identity of the sign by
deliberately and self-referentially constituting a scene upon
which the sign directs us to some center. Here, we would
embrace what Johanna Drucker (2013) calls “inscription,”
suggesting there is no sign without its embodiment and
embedment in material and historical enactment. The
problem with relying on metalanguage, or what Drucker
(2013) calls “notation,” of course, is that any metalanguage
is subject to the same self-difference as the language it tries

to control.
Language is going to be generative even if we act as if it is
representational—pretensions to a secure metalanguage
really serve to guarantee a moral or political certainty that
avoids the problem of creating in some space of language
the shared attention directed towards some center. We can
find the origin of this logocentrism in literacy. David Olson, in
his The World on Paper (1994) and The Mind on Paper
(2016), has shown that writing was created out of an inquiry
into language, including the speech scenes upon which
language is used. More recently, Olson has used the notion
of classic prose (taken from Mark Turner and Francis Noël-
Thomas’s book, Clear and Simple as the Truth) to show that
the telos of the metalanguage of literacy is to simulate a
scene, modeled on a presumed original speech scene, upon
which writer and readers are all present. It is for this purpose
that the metalanguage of literacy establishes norms
regarding the correctness of sentences and the uses of
words—which is to say, it is literacy that enshrines the
declarative sentence as the primary form of language—
metaphysics is just further elaboration on this.
Insofar as we rely on notation and metalanguage, then, we
imagine ourselves to be present on a simulated, always
already constructed scene, with guarantees provided in
advance that we all use the same sign. Definitions are

established and logic is enforced—indeed, what is logic
other than ensuring that, within a proposition, nothing in the
definitions of the words predicated on the subject is
inconsistent with the definition of the subject? (Determining
what counts as “inconsistency” will in turn involve further
definitional work.) We can then proceed to eliminate
deviants—the ungrammatical, the illogical, the unclear—
which further proves that those of us remaining are all in
possession of the same sign. This metalinguistic imaginary
elides the difference, constitutive of the declarative
sentence, between the scene of utterance and the
represented scene. Since the scene of writing and reading
can be represented on that scene itself, introducing a
difference within the scene, this elision generates anomalies
within metalanguage.
These anomalies open the intrinsically imitative and
therefore pedagogical dimension of language use that
metaphysical presence occludes. This pedagogical
dimension can only be enacted “infralinguistically,” to use
Bruno Latour’s (2007: 49) term.  In place of the hierarchy
between language and metalanguage we have the
performance of the difference of the metalinguistically
guaranteed sign through its representation until its event
nature is elicited. These efforts aim at making visible and
inescapable the event-character of the sign, which is to say
the sign’s inextricability from histories, traditions, the various

ways in which it has been used by different groups in
different situations and, above all, from some event, some
act of deferral, some origin, the participation in which is the
only the way we can reciprocally “authenticate” one
another’s use of the sign. What I have in mind here is using
language from the scene itself to frame the scene, rather
than invoking some metalanguage assumed to come from
outside and be unaffected by the scene. Let’s take, for
example, a political scientist making an argument regarding
the way new media have changed our understanding of
“pluralism” in a liberal society: is that political scientist’s
address to his fellow political scientists, or whomever he
takes his public to be, enacting the kind of pluralism his
argument claims to be possible or necessary?
I have been implicitly suggesting an infralinguistic strategy or
vocation for GA, whereby we speak and write in “originary”
and “generative” English (or any other language). The basic
concepts of GA, such as “desire,” “resentment,” “center” and
others don’t really allow us to remain unimplicated in the
objects of our analyses—on what basis could I claim to be
unresentfully drawing the contours of another’s resentment?
GA, then, despite its distinctive (if minimal) conceptual
vocabulary, is ill-suited to be a metalanguage. I am asking,
what kind of knowledge is GA? If it’s a new way of thinking,
it’s a new relation to language. For starters, I’m contending
that literacy is itself a second revelation, broadly parallel to

the emergence of the Big Man—the revelation here being, as
I pointed out before, the autonomy of the declarative
sentence.
We can make further use of Olson to get a sense of what the
implications of bringing this revelation to the fore as part of
the linguistic turn might be. Olson (2016) points out that the
metalanguage of literacy serves the purpose of
“supplementing” the presumed scene of recorded speech
with verbs referring implicitly to mental acts that would have
been performed in a speech situation. If I say someone
assumed something to be the case, I am reporting what
another said, while also distancing myself from it—the other
person was presumably more certain in speaking than I am
in reporting his speech. In an oral setting, this would have
been reflected in the tone—perhaps mildly mocking—in
which the speech was reported; since we don’t have that
tone, literacy introduces supplementary terms like “assume.”
This allows for another innovation of literacy: the distinction
between the meaning of an utterance, and the speaker’s
meaning—we can now represent all kinds of ways in which
the two can be at odds.
These verbs then get nominalized and we get new entities,
like “assumptions,” and whole new disciplines organized so
as to study them. All the human sciences are derived from
such nominalizations, and much of everyday discourse

(which has been transformed by literacy and the disciplines)
as well. Even universally available words like “thoughts” and
“ideas” are probably constructs of literacy. What this means
is that there are vast domains of linguistic usage that are
entirely dependent upon elaborations of the metalanguage
of literacy, and also completely oblivious to this fact. We
ourselves, within GA, are also thoroughly immersed in the
metalanguage of literacy—the difference is, we can know it,
and know why, and propose new disciplinary articulations
that show such words to be scene- and event-dependent.
Working “inscriptively,” then, would involve accepting that
writing is scenic itself, rather than an attempt to construct a
universally shared and permanent speech scene. There is no
single scene of writing—writing, rather, involves a
dissemination of texts, each of which would serve to
constitute a scene that might reference more or less directly
any and all of the other scenes organized around the
disseminated text. This means that writing generates
samples of language, no more directly related to one
particular scene upon which they are iterated than any other.
Charles Sanders Peirce (Buchler 1955: 152, 326) argued that
knowledge is always of the relation between a sample and
the population of which it is a sample. Once we abandon
attempts to supplement the source, then, we have samples
of language, and we generate hypotheses regarding their
relation to language as a whole.

Treating pieces of language as samples involves creating
anomalous uses, or, really, acknowledging that all uses are
anomalous, and accordingly situating ourselves on the
boundary between talking about something and no
longer/not yet quite talking about something—“sampling” is a
call, or imperative, to generate a new center with an object at
it. If we’re obeying the imperative derived from a concept,
like, say, “infralanguage,” or “inscription,” then we are looking
for samples of language serving as models of these
concepts, and looking for ways to make sense of less
obvious instances, even seeming counter-instances, in
terms of these concepts—for example, noting the
infralinguistic dimension inseparable from the most
rigorously applied metalanguage.
Insofar as we have a new center, we want to derive all
meaning from that center or, what comes to the same thing,
that center calls upon us to affirm or name the world in its
name: if we have a center we are using the same sign, and
its identity is affirmed in the self-reference that situates one
scene generated by the sign in a history of scenes with an
origin that is continually marked. Imperatives from the
previous scene, like “find new ways to talk about X,” or “use
the conceptual resources you have generated to replace
some less differentiated way of saying something,” generate
the subsequent scenes. Words that bear with them histories
distributed across self-referential networks are going to be

more generative.
Metalinguistic terms resist operationalization—what, exactly,
are we doing when we “assume” something? Are we always
assuming what we assume? If not, what’s the difference
between when we’re assuming and when we’re not? The
later Wittgenstein was fascinated and perhaps appalled by
the evanescence of the “referents” of such meta-linguistic
terms.[2]
It is precisely such terms we can operationalize
infralinguistically. If we make a study of “assumptions,” it is
not to define and categorize them or to leverage “hidden”
assumptions against explicit statements, but, perhaps, to
figure out when they come into view, and what kind of
thinking is going on when they don’t. Perhaps we can
imagine “assumptionless” linguistic performances; or
performances that are all assumptions, right there on the
surface. The purpose here being to show that such
imagining would require new forms of joint attention.
If language is the deferral of violence, the only thing we are
ever talking about is how we are going about deferring
violence. Forms of language that can be moved across
scenes make it possible to defer not only immediate forms of
violence but possible future forms, even ones that we can’t
yet imagine. In more critical discussions, where we’re
interested in the “viability” of concepts, what we’re really

inquiring into is how many possible uses for deferring
violence a particular constellation of words might have. If we
know this, but others don’t, in talking with others all we are
doing is helping them to know this. This knowledge must lie
in their own discourses, their own vocabulary—if they are
going to speak GA with us they would first have to see that
their own discourse is always already GA.
We’re all always and only talking about how we are deferring
violence, but if we don’t all always know this it is because the
sign can only refer to a single center, not centeredness in
general. So, in entering others’ discourse we identify those
signs where reference to a single center interferes with the
reference to centeredness as such. This would transform the
conversation into one centered on eliciting the distinction
between centering and centeredness. This distinction is
elicited by treating every utterance as both hypothesizing
the way some other sign refers to a center and being, as a
sample, a possible center. Our interest in that possible
utterance, or sample, then, is in how it can be iterated and
disseminated in ways that would make more explicit our
talking about the way we are deferring violence.
It is this practice of sampling, taking pieces of language and
pointing them at new centers, that makes language
generative, memorable and effective. The linguistic turn
entails a hypothesis: that the metaphysical scene of

humanism, predicated upon the metalinguistics of literacy,
has reached its limits as a means of deferring violence (or,
perhaps, was never a source of deferral in the first place).
But only the originary hypothesis enables us to complete the
linguistic turn, because only originary thinking can be free of
the victimary investments of those critiques of metaphysics
that emerged alongside the anti-colonial revolts. This, in
turn, opens up a difference within originary thinking. I would
characterize the difference as follows: on one side, we can
see the emergence of the modern marketplace as the
source of more advanced forms of deferral that have
marginalized if not eliminated the more evident and
egregious forms of violence endemic to premodern
hierarchies. On the other side, we can see the centralization
of state power, its extension into increasingly minute spheres
of life, and its destruction or subordination of intermediate
forms of power as the means by which violence has been
neutralized. In the first case, the means of maintaining and
extending existing forms of deferral are clear: continue
marketizing the social. In the second case, the question
becomes one of facilitating orderly forms of centralization
that don’t require the subversion of intermediate layers of
authority, since the subversion of authorities from the
nation-state to the local police is itself a cause of violence. In
this latter case, disputing the market model is of critical
importance, because belief in the spread of markets
obfuscates the problem of central authority which, within the

market model, can at best be seen as an instrument of
marketization but is as likely to be seen as an obstacle to be
weakened.
I see the “state centralization” model as more plausible than
the “market” model, because the state centralization model
can account for market relations (a central authority can
establish and regulate markets) while the converse is not the
case: if the world is becoming increasingly marketized, why
the massive growth of the state? Now, the relevance of this
question to the “completion of the linguistic turn” is as
follows. A completely marketized order is, as Eric Gans has
pointed out, an “omnicentric” one.[3]  In that case, one’s
response to the emergence of new resentments or conflicts
is to seek or create new centers. But any new center must
draw upon the resources and authority of some existing
center. At the very least, it must employ the linguistic
reserves of existing centers. To acknowledge this explicitly is
to repudiate omnicentrism, because reliance on an existing
center implies reliance on a history and tradition of centers,
among which some must have precedence over others. To
refuse to acknowledge this dependence is to assert the
spontaneity of the emergence of the new center. To the
extent that the emergence of a new center is spontaneous, it
is outside of history, tradition and authority. If omnicentrism
and therefore spontaneity are to be defended, this outside
needs to be “substantized.” This outside is the “target” of

the metalinguistics of literacy: liberal political theory has
designated this outside as “nature,” or “freedom,” or “natural
right.” An omnicentric generative anthropology would call it
“desire” and “resentment,” which, it must be assumed, are
irreducible to existing forms of authority. But it is hard to
deny that any particular form taken by desire and
resentment will “mortgage” those emotions to some
deployment of power within the existing forms of authority.
That desires and resentments are constitutively socially
leveraged can never be acknowledged by the market model.
And this means that metalinguistic assertions of humanistic
essentialism cannot be set aside.
Within the state centralization or, we could now say,
“unicentric,” model, we are committed to fully embedding
desires and resentments in their enacted and articulated
social form. A particular desire or resentment situates one
within a hierarchical order in which desire (to speak roughly)
is a projection of some agenda produced by the center and
resentment (to continue to speak roughly) is a response to
some derogation of authority by the center. There is always
some derogation of authority because authority can never
be implemented perfectly (the center can never completely
offer itself up), but the unicentric model allows us to posit an
alternative response to the omnicentric spinning of a new
center that must disguise its dependencies: improve the
form of authority by making its terms more explicit and its

operations more consistent. But in this case we have no
need for metalanguage because authority is completely
infralinguistic: the exercise of authority produces the frame
within which all the references point back to the form of
authority.
Omnicentrism, like metaphysics, must put the declarative
form first, because the assertion of a spontaneously
generated center must first of all repudiate some command
or demand that has curtailed desire and generated
resentment. The repudiation of the imperative is best
effected by the declarative elevated to primacy over the
imperative. For unicentrism, meanwhile, authority is first of
all ostensive, then imperative, and only finally declarative
(necessary for clarifying imperatives by directing them
toward prospective ostensives). Before anything else, we are
in a situation in which we are being asked to do something—
since the purpose of a metalanguage is to imagine ourselves
outside of that or any situation (to pre-negotiate the terms
on which we might freely and willingly enter some situation),
acknowledging the situation and working out, along with
others, its terms, precludes the need for any metalanguage.
All we need to do is make the terms of authority more self-
referential. This demands that we minimize our assumptions
regarding what counts as a scene of knowing, and let the
object, the “samples,” organize such scenes. The more
generative discourses will be those that can create

revelatory scenes of the origin and identity of the sign out of
the greatest differentiation in sign use. It is the discourse
that knows that all we’re ever doing is talking about how
we’re deferring violence without it ever being possible to be
completely explicit about that which will be the most
generative one. This kind of work would be making the
mimetic foundations of our practices more explicit while and
by being more overtly mimetic: studying Shakespeare by
making the scene of Shakespeare study “Shakespearean”;
studying the resentment represented in melodrama with a
kind of staged melodramatic resentment; studying the
sociology of crowds through a rhetoric that stages one’s
differentiation from encroaching crowds of students of
crowds; studying bureaucratic attempts to neutralize
violence by registering the violent effects of those attempts;
teaching writing courses as studies in the discipline of
composition—to suggest a few examples as food for
thought.
Works Cited
Buchler, Julius. Philosophical Writings of Peirce. Dover, 1955.
Drucker, Johanna. What Is?: Nine Epistemological Essays.
Cuneiform Press, 2013.
Gans, Eric.  Originary Thinking: Elements of Generative
Anthropology.  Stanford University Press, 1993.

Latour, Bruno. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to
Actor-Network Theory. Oxford University Press, 2007.
Olson, David. The Mind on Paper: Reading, Consciousness
and Rationality. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
⸻-. The World On Paper: The Conceptual and Cognitive
Implications of Writing and Reading. Cambridge University
Press, 1994.
Thomas, Francis Noël and Mark Turner.  Clear and Simple as
the Truth: Writing Classic Prose. Princeton University Press,
2011.
Wierzbicka, Anna. Experience, Evidence, & Sense: The
Hidden Cultural Legacy of English. Oxford University Press,
2010.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations.
Translated by G.E.M. Anscombe. Basil Blackwell, 1958.
Notes
[1] Wierzbicka traces the specifically English notion of
“experience” as a word referring to a process involving
observation, self-observation and present feeling
overwhelmingly to Locke’s usage:
The double prototype—Locke’s ‘see and feel’—ensures that,

while Locke’s conception of experience was not
retrospective . . . , it was not exclusively introspective either,
but rather introspective and extrospective at the same time.
The fact that Locke’s cultural descendants could use
experience both in phrases like ‘varieties of religious
experience’ and in statements like ‘science aims at
understanding the world of experience’ is related to this
terminological and conceptual equation between two
varieties of knowledge—that based on the thought ‘this is
happening to me now’ and that based on the thought ‘this is
happening here now.’
When one compares Locke’s model of experience with that
analyzed in section 2.3, one is struck, above all, by the
similarities: Clearly the conception reflected in modern
phrases like a frightening experience or a weird experience
was built on the foundation of Lockean epistemology (53).
Wierzbicka does add that “there are noticeable differences
between the two models,” but those are differences that
presuppose that “foundation.”
To   t a ke   a n o t h e r   e x a m p l e ,   W i e r z b i c k a   a t t r i b u t e s   t o   Lo c ke
considerable influence in shifting the meaning of “evidence”
from those truths which are undeniable (“evident”) to the
one calling for epistemic care and modesty: “But although
the ‘evidence of facts’ was often seen as ‘strong,’ even
‘unquestionable,’ the certainty derived from factual (and

ultimately sense-related) knowledge did not seem as
absolute as that previously linked with faith, ‘mathematical
certainty,’ or, indeed, an ‘ocular proof’: as Locke put it,
‘certainty and demonstration, are things we must not, in
these matters, pretend to.
Locke’s views on these matters were no doubt symptomatic
of a wider mood of the British Enlightenment, and above all,
they were themselves hugely influential: it is widely
acknowledged that epistemic caution and modesty
preached by Locke had an enormous impact on his
contemporaries and on many subsequent generations of his
readers (146).
[2] To take just one out of many possible examples in his
Philosophical Investigations, we might look at his brief
discussion in sections 101-105 of the “ideal” that “there
can’t be any vagueness in logic,” an ideal which “absorbs
us,” and leads us to believe “it must be in reality.” And, so,
“[t]he strict and clear rules of the logical structure of
propositions appear to us as something hidden in the
background. . . . Where does this idea come from? It is like a
pair of glasses on our nose through which we see whatever
we look at. It never occurs to us to take them off. . . . When
we believe we must find that order, must find the ideal, in our
actual language, we become dissatisfied with what are
ordinarily called ‘propositions,’ ‘words,’ ‘signs’” (45-6). As

literate beings, we have constructed a logic out of “actual
language,” projected that logic onto that language, and then
find the language less “real” because the grammar doesn’t
seem to be “there.”
[3] See, for example, Originary Thinking, 219.