

Mimesis, the Center and
Auto-Immunology: A Review
of Daniel Ross’s
Psychopolitical Anaphylaxis:
Steps Toward a Metacosmics.
Open Humanities Press 2021.
Adam Katz
Department of English
Quinnipiac University
Hamden, CT 06518
Adam.Katz@quinnipiac.edu
It’s long past time for originary thinking to think technics,
which is emerging, in the wake of the work of Gilbert
Simondon and Bernard Stiegler in particular, as a term to
refer to the co-constitution of the human with the
“exteriorizations” through which humans act on (and are
acted upon by) the world and each other. I would like to
establish the necessity to do so by pointing to a technical
issue in GA, which is to say, a scaling problem. The mimetic
interactions and central concepts of Girardian mimetic
theory and then Gansian Generative Anthropology are

unduly tied to, first, scenes upon which all persons are
present to each other (small groups) and, second, literature,
especially the realist novel (and Shakespeare, as read
consistently with realist novels), and to some extent, the
lyric. Concepts like envy, desire and resentment are readily
intelligible on this small scale: we know what it means to be
envious of a neighbor, resentful of a more successful
coworker, to desire the possessions or attributes of another
person.
Our representational technologies are suited to this scale,
but these concepts don’t scale up in any obvious way. What
can it mean to speak, on a social scale, of millions of people
of some more or less arbitrarily designated group
“resenting” millions of members of some other vaguely
defined group? What do we imagine we’re describing if we
say something like “women resent men,” “blacks resent
whites,” “whites resent immigrants,” etc.? All members of the
“resenting” group “feeling” in unison, continuously, and
doing nothing but resenting? Resenting in a differentiated
manner (some resent a lot, others less so, some not at all)?
Occasionally resenting, while at other times going about
their business? Wavering between resentment and
admiration, or indifference?
As soon as we try to explain some event or history trajectory
using such terms, we will find that we need to at least

mention intermediary factors, such as the media that single
out objects of desire and targets of resentment and suggest
actions to pursue such desires and resentments; institutions,
corporate, judicial, and law enforcement, that prevent or
facilitate the enactment of some desires and resentments
rather than others; educational and research institutions that
provide justifications and mitigations of one or another
desire or resentment, and so on. All these institutions involve
technics, that is, mediations that serve as material memories
of shared human practices. I don’t think it can be said that
there is any sustained thinking of technics in GA, and we
can’t scale up without it; and once we do scale up, our
concepts will take on a different shape, at least insofar as we
apply them to the historical world.
Fortunately, the world of academic theory has turned its
attention to questions of technics and technology: there is
the work of Benjamin Bratton, and the Strelka research
group he leads, which explores the implications of what
Bratton calls “planetary scale computation”; there is Yuk Hui,
who in several books has followed post-Heideggerian
discussions of technology through discussions of
cybernetics, recursivity, Western and Chinese ethics and
aesthetics, and Chinese thought on technics; design
theorists like Beatrice Colomina, historians of our growing
integration into informational systems like Orit Halpern or
researchers into the ethical and political dilemmas of

algorithmic rule like Louise Amoore, Taina Bucher and many
others. If I have to generalize, I would say that what powers
these discussions is a willingness to discard a
squeamishness regarding the potentially totalitarian
implications of modern technology, especially those types of
it that seem to extend into the remaking of subjectivity,
which we have inherited from both critical theory of the
Frankfurt School variant and post-structuralism—both of
which seemed to be consumed with preserving some
“humanity” or “unruly” subjectivity from the imposition of
what Jean-Francois Lyotard called the “performativity” of all
human practices. That whatever is entailed in being human
is inseparable from the technical is now presupposed, and
this will have important implications regarding the kinds of
subjectivities that must be presupposed as a basis of
liberalism and democracy: to put it simply, there can be no
more external human “measure” of the justice of social and
political arrangements.
Part of this new thinking of technics results from the
reception of thinkers of technics like André Leroi-Gourhan
and Gilbert Simondon whom one might say were
marginalized by the domination of structuralism and post-
structuralism, thinking that finds a kind of synthesis in the
work of Bernard Stiegler, who furthermore synthesizes a
critical appropriation of Derrida’s “grammatology” with his
reading of these precursors. The book I’m concerned with

here is by Daniel Ross, a long-time translator, explicator and
colleague of Stiegler. In this ambitious book he brings to
bear and extends Stiegler’s thought on the entirety of our
current crisis. Along the way he has an all too brief
encounter with Girardian mimetic theory (unsurprisingly, no
mention of Eric Gans), but I want to make the case for seeing
Ross as a crucial and enabling interlocutor for those of us
determined to introduce a thinking of technics into GA. To
suggest briefly the lines along which I will make the case, if
we can imagine speaking of mimetic crisis as death driving
“entropy,” and the originary event and the linguistic world
emerging from it as “negentropic” (terms Stiegler and now
Ross take over from systems theory and cybernetics) we
already have the terms on which we can learn from Ross and
perhaps teach him a few things in turn.
The technophobia of humanists and poststructuralists alike
has been complemented by a “biophobia,” or a terror of
seeing human life as continuous with life in general. Here, as
elsewhere, the founding of post-war thought on the
revulsion from Nazism left its mark. It is here that Stiegler,
and here Ross, identify the limits of Derridean
deconstruction. Derrida, in one of most famous early
articulations of “difference,” in a passage referencing
(briefly) Leroi-Gourhan, proclaimed the “mark,” or the
“gramme,” as suggesting that “inscription” needs to be
considered as part of the history of “life.” Derrida, despite

returning repeatedly to the need to deconstruct the
boundaries between life and death, animal and human, never
continued this line of inquiry, preventing his project, in Ross’s
view, from fulfilling its early promise due to a reluctance to
pursue the history of “inscription” beyond anything that
could be called “writing.”
Stiegler retrieves this promise of a grammatology. Rather
than writing, it is, for Stigler, technics that has been
suppressed by metaphysics. The very fact that it is still
habitual to speak of the human as something outside of
technology, and affected after the fact by it, in control of or
losing control over it, demonstrates the depth of this
suppression. Stiegler, drawing upon Husserlian
phenomenology, and continuing Derrida’s deconstruction of
it, provides a simple and plausible frame for thinking
technics: as retention. There is, first of all, “primary
retention,” which is the “memory” of the information of life
itself, encoded in the genes; there is then “secondary
retention,” the memory of and capacity to repeat and, within
limits, depending upon the degree of complexity of the
organism, vary “action sequences” that are not transmitted
beyond the individual animal. And there is, finally, the tertiary
retention characterizing humans, in which material is
inscribed with the results of the learning and experience of
the human community. Technics, then, begins with the
“mark” on some material, a mark that differentiates itself

from other marks and defers the meaning indicated by the
mark insofar as that meaning can only be redeemed by
subsequent marks.
Stiegler acknowledges the question: whence tertiary
retention? He speaks of a “default of origin,” which anyone
cognizant of the originary hypothesis will find unsatisfactory.
Stiegler comes close to recognizing the need to think about
the origin in terms of an event in insisting that the “first”
mark would be “accidental” but nevertheless meaningful.
This is as far as Stiegler (and Ross, declaring any answer to
the question of “invention” “impossible” [93]) goes—how
this accidental meaningfulness, or meaningful accidentality,
might have emerged, goes unexplained. Stiegler has not
repudiated the “origin-phobia” that, along with the
aforementioned technophobia and biophobia, have
characterized post-War thinking (and in this case goes much
further back). It seems he would rather think in terms of a
gradual process in which humans would find themselves
with tertiary retention without realizing how they came by it—
as if the various “marks” made by our hominid predecessors
came, imperceptibly, to take on a new character.
But that just means that the originary hypothesis has a
different account of tertiary retention, of the objectification
of memory in some material. Where, exactly, though? The
sign itself? This is still “internal” to each individual member

of the group, even if each matches his gesture to the others.
The central object is consumed and, anyway, is not really
“inscribed.” We can see why technics seems a much later
development, rather than co-originary with the human itself
—the intangible dimension of the scene, the transcendent
center, seems not to rely on any lasting mark—memory is
retained in the group as a whole. But, then, that must be the
co-origin of technics—the configuration of the scene itself,
maintained by the reciprocal coordination and holding in
place of each by the others. That’s a kind of inscription—the
scene is the marking of each by all and all by each. The
originary scene is commemorated in ritual, and the specific
movements, arrangements and props that organize the
scene through the accretion of the memories of the group in
its ongoing dialogue with the center is the origin of
technology.
Life is a struggle against entropy, which is to say, it is what
Ross refers as to as the “negentropic” counter-tendency to
entropy. The construction of internal systems engaged in
interchange with an external environment creates regulation
and self-reproduction, which is nevertheless always
threatened by and always defending against the broader
entropic environment. The creation of structures resistant to
entropy is always improbable, then, and to that extent
incalculable, an observation that will have important ethical
implications for Ross. The originary hypothesis is entirely

consistent with the establishment of negentropic agencies
and tendencies: mimesis is first of itself negentropic insofar
as the capacity of members of a group to learn from each
other enhances each member of the group’s ability to resist
entropic tendencies; but mimesis itself turns entropic once it
interferes with other group stabilizing mechanisms (the
pecking order) and, more precisely, subtracts rather than
adding information regarding the action sequences of other
members of the group. Some knowledge of a likely range of
action sequences attributable to other members of the
group (of whatever species) is essential to group stability,
and what characterizes a mimetic crisis is that this
knowledge becomes impossible. Maybe the other members
of the group will order themselves in familiar ways, but it’s at
least as likely they won’t and, since there’s no way of
knowing in this novel situation, it makes the most sense to
assume the worst which, in turn, encourages all the others to
assume the worst about you as well. The originary gesture is
a highly improbable, indeed extraordinary, restoration of
information exchange amongst members of the group and
erects the tertiary retention that must henceforth be
protected for its negentropic effectiveness.
I can’t recall any discussions in GA that take the notion of the
“scenic” literally enough to consider that scenes need to be
constructed, and constructed in such a way as shape
actions so as to keep all members of the group in conformity

with the constraints and affordances of the scene itself. The
earliest ritual scenes, of course, design a scene, with props,
costumes and boundaries separating the scene from what is
outside of it, but also turning what is outside of the scene
into potential supports for a modified or expanded scene, so
as to align everyone in the relation to the center dictated by
the center. In constructing scenes, material is inscribed and
arranged so as to derive information from the center. If we
think scenically in this way, we are prepared to enter fully
into commerce with discourses such as Ross’s, and provide
an anthropological “density” lacking in Ross’s discussion.
Such scenic thinking, that is, is what will enable GA to scale
up. Indeed, rather than Ross’s still subject-centered analysis
of the political, which remains focused on the kinds of
citizens need to sustain negentropic institutions (an
important question, of course), we can argue for a more
center-focused approach that tracks the successive
occupations of the center, from the divine beast of the
earliest human communities, through the Big Man, sacred
kingship, divine kingship, empire, through to today’s liberal
democratic centralizing anti-centrism. We can think of the
kind of scenes that need to be constructed in each case so
as ensure that information flows back and forth between
center and periphery.
There would be plenty of room for productive disagreements

here—a liberal case might be made, for example, to the
effect that with sufficiently trained and rehearsed “actors”
(“educated citizens” in a high trust society), a wide dispersal
of scenes allowing for high levels of improvisation would
allow for an ongoing exchange with a minimally authoritative
center temporarily occupied by figures who are selected
from and reintegrate back into the periphery following their
tenure. This would, furthermore, direct our attention to the
construction of scenes (“educational” and “media”) that
ensure the kinds of necessary “rehearsals.” It would also
keep us aware that all of us, as participants in the design of
whatever scenes we contribute to, are ourselves fully
products of the scenes we have rehearsed on and for,
scenes designed by those whose work we continue.
Stiegler, as Ross points out, draws upon the invention of
alphabetic writing, as analyzed in the work of the linguist
Sylvain Auroux, to develop the concept of “grammatization,”
which is “Auroux’s name for the process necessary for the
temporal flow of speech to be turned into the spatial and
material forms of alphabetic writing, necessarily involving the
discrimination and analysis, not necessarily conscious, of the
discrete phonetic elements that would become the letters”
(38). This is critical to Stiegler’s revision and continuation of
the project of grammatology initiated by Derrida:
Stiegler’s genius was to recognize that a process of

spatialization, materialization, discretization and analysis lies
at the root, not just of the alphabetic writing that made
possible the Greek polis and its tragedy, philosophy and
democracy, but also of the industrial revolution. In the latter
case, however, this was a process of grammatization applied
not to the temporal flow of speech but to the temporal flow
of gesture, and, more specifically, of the gestures of the
tool-equipped hands (those hands that are the exosomatic
consequence of the pre-hominin foot that becomes implied
by the tool) of workers possessing the knowledge of how to
craft material objects, from the weaver to the potter to the
blacksmith and beyond. It was this gestural knowledge of
the worker that had to become subject to a process of
grammatization in order for the mechanization and
automation of industrial manufacturing to be established in
the nineteenth century. (ibid)
We can see in this discussion the prerequisite for Stiegler ’s
notion of “proletarianization” that he sees as having
accompanied industrialization, as the knowledge, tacit and
inherited, as well as explicit, of workers gets expropriated
and transferred to the owners and managers of machines
(and of humans). The “gramme” must have preceded
“grammatization”; if the gramme is the
accidental/meaningful mark that defines the human variation
on life then “grammatization” goes all the way back (even if
we’d want to distinguish it conceptually from what Ross is

referring to here). Ritual itself involves the “discretization” of
the gesture, refining so that it serves more effectively in the
“mnemotechnic” practice that is ritual—and a ritual will be
more or less effective depending upon how it is designed so
as to preserve the memory of everything that has “worked”
in previous scenes, in response to disruptive events.
Moreover, ritual is meant to do something and make
something happen, even if what it makes happen is not
exactly what the participants imagine it does (is not the
same true to some extent with technology?), so to think of
technology as emerging out of ritual as a new way of eliciting
information from the center is not really a stretch. The break
from ritual that will eventually make a genuine technical
thought and practice possible would, then, involve those
occasions on which some sovereign actor must act upon
either his own or another community as such—such external
organization could not be covered by internal ritual
arrangements. So, such events as conquest, war, and the
levying of mass labor armies is what would “liberate”
technics from its ritual origins. Technology would still be a
practice of materializing memory, but in this case memory of
those external interventions which discretized gesture for
some unprecedented purpose.
Meanwhile, the expropriation of the knowledge of workers
brought about by grammatization does make possible new

forms of knowledge—knowledge of the results of
grammatization itself, which involves the creation of a
system of references, which can themselves be compressed
into more complex references, of the more or less
automated practices comprising the system. The problem is
that the transition from one form of knowledge to the next is
far from “automatic,” and in the meantime can generate
significant amounts of resentment towards a newly
interventionist and imperious center. The establishment of
new pedagogical relations necessary for the transition is
costly and uncertain, since it is inevitably unprecedented
itself, and can be easily seen as part of the same
expropriation it aims at ameliorating and then converting it
into genuine social advances. It seems very likely that the
new industrializing elites will focus directly on simply
immunizing the new arrangements against this disruptive
resentment, thereby further disqualifying and alienating the
displaced target populations.
The necessary scenic conditions, that is, are daunting. This
is part of the “pharmacological” nature of all transformations
in the social “exoskeleton,” in which what is medicine is also
poison. Ross has a long and interesting discussion of the
way industrializing society directly accesses and
manipulates the “limbic system” as a means of social control
(further proletarianization, this time of the intellect), but I
think we can frame the problem he’s pointing to more simply.

The fully technological (post-ritual) system relies upon a
steady flow of reliable “information,” that is, signs that can
be immediately put to some use (and therefore quickly
become useless). Ross, following Stiegler, insists on a very
sharp distinction between “information” and “knowledge,”
and I think we could say that information is the direct
descendant of ritual insofar as its use is measured by the
immediate transformation it effects.
But information can be, like currency, constantly pumped
into the system so as to become “useful” in simulated, ritual-
like ways, while being ultimately worse than useless, that is,
harmful. We could say that much political information is like
this, as it is used to stage polarizing scenes that are
meaningless in the strict sense that the outcome of the
events staged changes nothing while the constant “rush” of
information builds an “addiction” to more such information.
Knowledge, meanwhile, we can now say, synthesizing Ross’s
analysis with my previous reworking of “scenic thinking,” is
more a descendent of myth and involves “rehearsing for the
improbable.” This is indeed very difficult because it requires
that one defer the direct investment in the polarizations of
the moment and learn to look for what, in terms of those
information-driven scenes, would be improbable in terms of
those scenes but provides the resources for a “organology”
that would remediate the scenic conditions of social
participation.

The ”cosmos” in Ross’s subtitle refers to the Greek word for
an order that generates and finds sufficient for its self-
regulation knowledge of actors directly involved in the
interactions comprising the order. The challenge of the
contemporary world is, in fact, to scale up a “cosmic” order
to global dimensions. Ross provides a sustained and subtle
critique of Friedrich Hayek’s pretensions to be supportive of
such an (market) order against a state-led command
economy (an exogenous, or “taxis” order), but, by
associating “cosmos” with the self-regulation offered by the
cybernetic autonomization not only of functions within the
market but markets themselves, lays the theoretical
groundwork for today’s neoliberal imposition (often state
mandated) of “market” imperatives (really, subjected to the
calculations of global financial institutions) on all spheres of
life. And this expropriation is predicated, paradoxically, on
the naturalization of what are necessarily artificial socio-
economic relations:
Hayek’s version of the cosmo-local is therefore
fundamentally based on a denial of Stiegler’s demonstration
that the condition of all neganthropic order is artificial and
that the function of neganthropic reason arises and can arise
only from processes of artificial selection, where shifts in
these processes disrupt existing systems and existing forms
of knowledge, and therefore present a problem requiring the
care-ful reinvention of knowledge and not just the

assumption that existing knowledge guarantees successful
adjustment to changed economico-technological conditions.
(264)
At this point, Ross’s very ambitious book is taking on the
global economy, which it’s hard to imagine anyone, at this
point, seeing as very just or functional. Whatever one’s
politics and whatever one’s views of inequality, social justice,
or the question of climate change (Ross’s book is published
in a series entitled CCC2 Irreversibility, predicated upon
addressing a crisis in the progress of climate change), there
is clearly much to be addressed in a global economy in
which most activity is controlled by a few dozen mega-
corporations with no imperative other than maintaining
control over economic activity and beholden to no sovereign
power (only perhaps a few of which could exercise any
control, and that only through very intrusive and coercive
mechanisms).
Ross advocates a transition to what he calls a “contributory
economy,” without saying very much about what that looks
like or how to get there. Ross’s book is refreshingly free of
cant and NGO-speak about “strengthening democratic
institutions,” “renewing citizenship,” etc., but he also doesn’t
have much to say about political institutions, especially the
state. There’s a real problem here, because if one gets
serious and hopes to be precise about agencies capable of

bringing about any kind of change without collapsing into
laughable clichés about “grass-roots movements,” one ends
up fixing one’s eyes on the very figures who seem to be the
problem—those with power.
This is another way of saying that Ross, while admirably
avoiding the trap of indulging in yet another set of political
fantasies involved in “decentralization,” does not want to
discuss the center. Stiegler, or, for that matter, Peter
Sloterdijk, whom Ross invokes later on to talk about the
immunological disorders that seem to be accelerating
entropy and “anthropy” (the dispossession of the
“endogenous” knowledge needed to construct and maintain
negentropic orders), seems to leave him bereft here. Ross
here invokes an anti-metaphysical tradition of thought that
he traces from Empedocles through Nietzsche and Freud,
that would see reality as composed of a perpetual struggle
between opposing forces, with this mode of thought
enabling the “metacosmical” program Ross calls for.
All this remains within contemporary philosophical debates:
what tensions, exactly, are to be “composed” in such a way
as to ensure the kind of “localizations” required for
endogenous knowledge production? Thinking scenically and
mimetically can help here as well. Indeed, if we are suffering
from “anaphylaxis,” that is, an exaggerated and potentially
deadly response of the body to some disturbance that is not

really that dangerous, can we not attribute this over-reaction
to the anti-“totalitarian” fervor that has guided Western
politics since WW II? Doesn’t any stance or proposal that
reminds too many people (that triggers recognition in the
exosomatic or institutional memory) of one or another of the
totalitarian enemies (Nazi Germany and “fascism” in WW II
and the USSR in the Cold War) send the political and
ideological system into overdrive, sending out antibodies
that extirpate anything the liberal democratic order
considers anomalous?
This auto-immune disorder has the paradoxical result of
attacking every form of social attachment that can’t be
“read” by the “programs” created by the neoliberal
algorithm, with the result that the means of identifying and
neutralizing potentially threatening antigens (like social
media TOS violation determinations and the priorities of the
intelligence and police agencies with which they are linked)
are increasingly centralized precisely as a function of the
reigning anti-centerism (any decision that comes
transparently from a responsible center triggers the release
of antibodies). That more and more books, like Ross’s,
explore these questions without seeming to worry too much
whether they are too “like” either “extreme” may be a sign
that some autoimmune adjustment is possible. We may be
ready to devote our political resources to something other
than mopping up after either of the two great 20
th
 century

conflicts.
What we need to “care” about in order to transition to the
“contributory,” to be blunt, is a pathological anti-centerism.
(We could say that the “West” is best defined, not in terms
of shuffling around various definitions of “freedom,” but as
the first social order that sought to maintain a perpetual
opposition to any settled center.) This is an anti-centerism
so pathological that even those who actually occupy the
center are devoted to it—no person in power, whether
elected official or member of any one of the numerous
“committees” and “commissions” claiming the right to plan
our future offers any form of legitimation that doesn’t involve
fighting against some other more powerful center. Everyone
wants power to fight the power, without ever wanting to
acknowledge that this constitutes an admission that there
will always be power.
Not only does each national state use every crisis and
pseudo-crisis to reach more deeply into every aspect of its
subject’s lives (and, therefore, Ross wants to point out,
subjectivities), but the fact that the summer of 2020 saw
“Black Lives Matter” demonstrations across the world,
regardless of racial composition or race relations in all those
countries, indicates that much of the world would like to look
on the US as a de facto world government, even if cynically,
as a way of gaining leverage. Our own contribution to this

crisis of the center is to advance, as an economic and
political principle, one of the simplest imaginable principles:
emulation. Someone you look up to is someone
“programming events” you would like to “contribute” to. And
someone you don’t or can’t look up to, but who is
nevertheless in power, can be presented with the demand to
become worthy of emulation. This is how you turn poison
into medicine: study people in their social roles with an
interest in everything that might make them actionable
models.
I’m not talking about some anodyne “character matters”
political pablum or, if we want to apply that label, we’d have
to keep in mind that only someone who fills his office is
worthy of emulation, and to fill one’s office is to assume all
its formal powers and responsibilities and expose all
attempts by informal and “behind the scene” actors to
interfere with the exercise of those powers. Ross has nothing
to say about ritual, as his notion of a small scale “cosmic”
order seems to draw upon models such as the medieval city
or small town, but ritual order is equally endogenous while
involving more of a “prayerful” than a “careful” relation, not
just to other members, but to the center.
A prayer involves an exchange of imperatives: tell me how to
serve you. At its most refined, or most “technical,” the
imperative exchange enacted in prayer distills itself into

something like “help me to know how to donate to you.” This
is an exchange prior to any market and an exchange that is a
genuine “composition” insofar as the relationship is nothing
more than the exchange itself. Moreover, such an exchange
relation is the proper relation to those whom we emulate or
would emulate or, for that matter, to those who might
emulate us.
If such relations are impossible and even unthinkable, well,
then, that is what needs to be remedied, and if you want to
say that doing so is impossible and unthinkable, I will simply
respond by saying all the familiar bromides regarding
freedom, democracy, citizenship, justice and so on are far
more so, and nonsensical and ultimately vicious as well.
They all represent fantasies of a more real order that will
some day be able to shake off the center: I’m not obeying
any orders from you until you’ve provided me with a full
account of the infrastructures ungirding your power (how
you came by it, with whose help, in whose interest, at whose
expense, in conformity with or denial of which legal
mechanisms or principles...)—to my satisfaction, of course.
This is the resentment that scales up and proliferates virally
across the social and political order without regard to
distinctions between right and left. More local resentments,
of the kind that provide the material for pulp media
narratives, are mere “spin-offs” of this more general one.

Within the current “organological” arrangements, the most
urgent medium of exchange between center and periphery is
data. Any decision anyone, at any level of the social order,
has to make, whether it regards corporate governance in
turbulent times or which private nursery school to try and
enroll your child in (or, needless to say, whether to take—or
mandate—a particular vaccine) will depend upon readily
available, competently packaged, and “legible” data. We all
know about the intense interest companies and the social
media companies gathering “intelligence” on their behalf
have in our personal data; governments are no less
interested in such data, to the point where traditional ways of
thinking about privacy and civil liberties seem pathetically
outdated.
We as individuals are equally (desperately) dependent upon
reliable data from power centers, whether they be
governments, corporations, or other institutions like
universities—or, for that matter, “rogue” sources we may
trust more but themselves must claim some access to
secure data banks.  Data is becoming more currency than
currency itself; indeed, isn’t one of the virtues attributed to
money that it provides reliable and up-to-date information
on the field of social desires and distribution of resources
and labor capacities? As money becomes more malleable, it
can perhaps be massaged so as to become more akin to
data gathered elsewhere within what Benjamin Bratton calls

the planetary scale computation that draws upon ubiquitous
sensing, measuring, and calculating devices. We need data
to design the many scenes on which we act, and thinking in
terms of data exchange will help us to mind Ross’s injunction
to strive for a genuinely “cosmological” order in which the
integrity of each node of “individuation” (individual, family,
community, institution, locality, nation, transnational
organization, etc.) as a site of data curation is acknowledged
precisely in the name of a more “intelligent” as well as more
“idiomatic” (that is, differentiated) order. Every one of us
does know things about our respective milieus that no one
else does, even if it may sometimes be the case that the
proper questioning or framing is required to elicit such
knowledge.
So, rehearsing for the improbable means enhancing one’s
curatorial capacities so that one is increasingly competent in
providing data that might be of use to the center and sifting
through the data that comes at one through the center. This
may sound banal, and I hope there is something
commonsensical and readily accessible to such a “politics,”
but the kind of practice I have in mind involves a whole range
of difficult judgments regarding how to inquire, whom to
trust, how to make oneself worthy of trust, what to disclose,
when, and to whom, and endless learning regarding the
creation, encoding, protecting and distributing of data. It
requires “imagining” expanded scenes, upon which the data

one has at hand might take on very different meanings as it
is included in very different data sets over time and across
space within the various mnemotechnical institutions.
And it requires the habit of treating as data what is not
ordinarily seen as such, like one’s everyday use of language,
which, in a sense is where all data exchange finds its
terminus. Think about what it would mean to gather, in
various formal and informal ways, at different scales, data
regarding what “following an order” “means” today (a very
Wittgensteinian question, but one brought into history). The
orders you receive and comply with or resist, and those you
yourself give and find obeyed or not in varying degrees and
manners might be your starting point. But your inquiry could
lead you to examine the vast expanse of the current order. At
stake is our basic linguistic knowledge, upon which all other
data collection, curation, and interpretation depends—if we
can’t say that we know what it means to follow an order,
what can we say we know? Restoring such basic linguistic
capacities is the first order of business in contributing to the
kind of “metacosmos” Ross would have us turn our sights to.
For GA, meanwhile, this focus on data exchange serves as a
reminder that we are always on a scene, even if the scenes
upon which we act today are more likely to be disciplinary
research scenes than ritual ones. A scene is a scene—it is
bounded, it is “set,” it positions actors in relation to each

other with some kind of shared attention toward a center—
even if that shared attention needs to be located by
someone outside of the scene, a spectator, which is itself
merely another scene, but one that can be represented
within the spectated scene. We can scale up and scale down
as much as is necessary—what counts as data, or a
“sample,” will differ from scene to scene, even if it’s the
“same” object presented differently at the center of different
scenes. What we determine to treat as data provides an
ostensive anchor to any scene. Data exchange therefore
names a mode of deferral suited to this more thoroughly
industrialized age, as we must always act on the data we
have and the analysis we’ve made of it, while keeping in
mind that data continues to come in and might dictate some
new programming at any moment. It’s therefore helpful in
dispersing the various on and off line mobs that gather
under the influence of various information “highs.” It enables
us, that is, to model ways of thinking and acting worthy of
emulation, so that GA can become integral to the
contributory economy.
Bibliography
Amoore, Louise. Cloud Ethics: Algorithms and the Attributes
of Ourselves. Duke University Press, 2020.
Bratton, Benjamin. The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty.
The MIT Press, 2016.

Bucher, Taina. If... Then: Algorithmic Power and Politics.
Oxford University Press, 2018.
Colomina, Beatriz and Mark Wigley. Are We Human? Notes
on an Archeology of Design. Lars Muller Publications, 2017.
Halpern, Orit. Beautiful Data: A History of Vision and Reason
Since 1945. Duke University Press, 2015.
Hui, Yuk. Art and Cosmotechnics. e-flux Architecture, 2021.
⸻-. The Question Concerning Technology in China: An
Essay in Cosmotechnics. Urbanomic, 2016.
Leroi-Gourhan, Andre. Gesture and Speech. MIT Press,
2018.
Simondon, Gilbert. UI. University of Minnesota Press, 2017.
Stiegler, Bernard. Te c h n i c s   a n d   T i m e   1 :   T h e   F a u l t   o f
Epimetheus. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998.
⸻-. Te c h n i c s   a n d   T i m e   2 :   D i s o r i e n t a t i o n. Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 2009.
⸻-.Te c h n i c s   a n d   T i m e   3 :   C i n e m a t i c   T i m e   a n d   t h e
Question of Malaise. Stanford: Stanford University Press,
2010.