

Book Review: Nemesis: The
Jouvenelian vs. the Liberal
Model of Human Orders, by
C.A. Bond
Adam Katz
177 pages
Ebook $9.95
Print: $15.95
The way people speak about their relation and attitude
toward the liberal democratic social orders most of us live
under tends to be, upon reflection, odd. It seems simple
enough to say something like, “I am loyal to King ____”; or “I
am a faithful servant of the king”; even if we have a suitably
modern, that is, resentful, disdain for such formulations, the
relation between the one expressing and the one receiving
that expression of fealty is clear. But it’s strange to say “I
have faith in,” or “believe in,” liberal democracy. It’s even
worse if we get more institutionally precise: do I “believe” in
the Constitution, or the “balance of power” between
executive, legislative and judicial branches? “Belief” and
“faith” imply some suspension of rational, critical judgment—
but isn’t that what the Enlightenment-informed liberal

democracies would have us refuse to do? In the U.S., we
even speak of “faith” in the “individual,”—which means what,
exactly? Faith in the individual’s capacity and the likelihood
of him/her/xir exercising that capacity to do what? All,
individuals, all the time?
Shouldn’t citizens of liberal democratic orders think along
the following or similar lines? As adherents of the scientific
method, which provides us with the only way of knowing
anything about reality and acting intelligently upon it, we
assume any particular social order is essentially
experimental, with its effects to be regularly assessed
according to scientifically constructed criteria of social and
human flourishing. So far, the hypothesis that establishing
institutions predicated upon the assumption that social order
must be erected upon, and serve to preserve and measure,
the consent of each individual to that social order, remains
unfalsified. In the meantime, we not only remain open to, but
actively solicit and assimilate evidence challenging this
hypothesis: indeed, a central purpose of the secular social
sciences that have developed alongside of liberal
democracy should be to test and organize that evidence in
order to continually determine whether the anomalies
(relative to our ongoing reconstructions of liberal democratic
political theory) they might point to can be reconciled within
the existing paradigm or make it incumbent upon us to
develop new, more inclusive ones.

Needless to say, the “belief” in “consent” is one of many
articles of faith of liberal democracy, rather than a
hypothetical proposition to be empirically tested. But this
belief is itself an anomaly in political theory, now
systematically, if involuntarily, parodied by the ever shrinking
micro-aggressions and lowered thresholds for “sexual
assault” so central to contemporary political discourse. If
one could violate the other without knowing it by, for
example, reproducing markers of past violence of which the
victim herself need not be aware (a third party could point it
out), then “consent” is alluded to (the notion of “violation” is
unintelligible without it) without the possibility of
reconstructing any intentionality informing it. This suggests
that the “consent” upon which the entire order hangs cannot
be seen with the naked eye. I’ve already started to violate
the first rule of liberal democracy, which is to not look too
closely at how the concepts central to liberal democracy
work, or are produced. But those of us interested in helping
GA become a powerful, comprehensive mode of social
thought would do well to join others in disregarding this rule,
because of the flimsiness of liberal democratic thought itself,
the vagueness of liberal democracy’s institutional claims and
justifications and, above all, the emergence of serious critics
of liberal democracy in the midst of what those critics (and
how many others?) see as a crisis of this social order—a
crisis best embodied in the now seemingly unassailable
belief that “belief” in (“consent to”) one’s gender must be

“re-affirmed” at every moment.
A particularly important critic, C.A. Bond, who blogged for
several years at Reactionary Future, has come out with a
new book, Nemesis: The Jouvenelian vs. the Liberal Model
of Human Orders, which synthesizes and further develops
the work done on that blog. To situate Bond’s book within
concerns critical to GA, I will begin by looking at the moment
in his book where he explicitly refers to the originary
hypothesis:
What would an anthropology in accordance with the
Jouvenelian model look like? Possible alternatives include
the mimetic anthropology of René Girard and the linguistic
developments made by Eric Gans, which we can briefly
review.
In the anthropology inaugurated by René Girard, the
sacrificial order of society, which Jouvenel himself
recognised as key to early human societal formation in the
form of magical Power, is not the creation of human
individuals and separate from them, but an integral part of
them. In the work of Girard, the move from a pre-human
society of mimetic beings to a (still fundamentally mimetic)
human society was the result of a mimetic crisis. Girard’s
theory is based upon the observation that humans are,
therefore, inescapably mimetic. The nature of desire is such
that it is not, as assumed by modern liberal anthropology,

inherent to the individual and sovereign—the individual does
not face society with his own desires to then be satisfied
within a marketplace, but learns these desires from others.
For Girard, this mimetic desire is a source of conflict and
tension within societies, and it is mitigated through the act of
focusing the cumulative mimetic desires of a society on a
single individual who becomes a scapegoat. In the act of
killing this scapegoat, the individuals become aware of both
the violence towards the scapegoat blamed for this
collective animosity and the dissipation of this animosity.
The sacrificial scapegoat becomes at once the cause of all
the society’s ills, and also its salvation from these ills. The
scapegoat then becomes a sacred object.
In the work of Eric Gans, this model is presented as an
explanation for the origin of language, where the creation of
the first sign, and therefore the beginning of language,
results from an abortive ostensive gesture in the process of
mimetic descent on (most likely) an animal which has been
killed. This abortive sign is hypothesised to be a
representation of the object at the centre of the group’s
collective mimetic desire. In both intensely mimetically
desiring the object, yet also being aware of the violence that
will ensue if members of the group all descend on the object,
the sign takes on a sacred nature. It is in the wake of the
collective attention created by this event that language is
first generated from an ostensive syntactical form which has

subsequently evolved into a number of further forms, these
being the imperative and then the declarative. Thus, in this
scheme, language is a product of mimetic desire, is
generative, and as in Girard’s account, presupposes an
anthropological model implying that humanity has resulted
from a process of shared attention around a centre external
to any of the individuals. The human individual of modernity
makes no sense within such a system, since everything from
language to thought (which always occurs within a
language) is premised on a mimetic relationship that is
incomplete without reference to this shared external centre.
The reader may raise issues with hypothetically entertaining
such anthropological accounts, but before dismissing them
we must acknowledge that these accounts present far fuller
explanations of human orders, and that they provide grounds
for a deeper understanding than that of the modern
anthropology of atomistic individuals possessing a radical
subjectivity. We can go even further and claim that this
modern anthropology is not only incompatible with the
Jouvenelian model, but that its development is, in actuality,
explainable by the model as a side effect of the Jouvenelian
conflicts which have occurred within the Western world. To
this end, we shall first review the development of theories of
political legitimacy and sovereignty in light of the
Jouvenelian model in order to provide a context within which
the individual of the modern model can be fully understood.

(25-7)
The “Jouvenelian model” Bond is referring to, and which his
book is opposing to the liberal model, starts from the
assumption that “there is in every society a centre of
control” (24). What Bond aims to show in his book is that
political reality is generated by the struggle of final power
centers against intermediate power centers which interfere
with the governing imperatives as determined by the final
center. Familiar examples would be a medieval king
contending with the nobility as he attempts to levy taxes to
prosecute a war or some other project; or mid-20
th
 century
attempts on the part of America’s federal government to
assimilate the recalcitrant Southern states into a fully
modern, liberal order. Bond is using mimetic theory to
challenge liberal individualism: for liberalism, the individual
precedes society, which means that society must be
explained as separate individuals joining together voluntarily.
Bond, in the passage quoted here, is pointing out that, while
the history of power that Bertrand de Jouvenel advanced, in
particular in his On Power, according to which the power
center (the monarch and then the state in modernity)
increases its power relative to the “middle” by mobilizing the
lower members of society against that middle, presupposes
an non-individualist anthropology, Jouvenel himself
continues to rely upon an individualist anthropology. Bond, in
refining and strengthening the model he adopts from

Jouvenel, finds it necessary to follow Jouvenel back to his
own account of (“magical”) social origins and challenge that
(still residually liberal) account with a more powerful one.
That more powerful account is the originary hypothesis,
which enables us to see how we could never think of human
orders apart from some center. I would take this reference as
an invitation to thinkers within GA to take on the task of
questioning liberalism and theorizing outside of its terms.
Nemesis is a relentless demolition of liberal concepts. This
demolition is carried out by demonstrating, in a thoroughly
documented manner, that all the concepts of liberalism—
“equality,” “sovereignty,” the “individual,” “human rights,” and
so on—are produced, not by moral advances, theoretical or
philosophical inquiries, or “bottom-up” revolts of the
oppressed, but, rather, by powerful actors within or close to
the heights of state power levying powerless groups against
institutions such as the Church, the aristocracy, the paternal
authority of the family and, more recently, institutions
maintaining law and order, education, business, dependent
states, and more. Bond traces this process back to medieval
Christendom, in struggles within the Church and between
the Church and the early European monarchs, through
transformative events like the Reformation and the French
Revolution, and up to contemporary movements like Black
Lives Matter. It’s probably best to focus here on the concept
of the “individual,” which Bond focuses on in Chapter 4, as

the origin of perceptions, thoughts and experiences. The
“individual,” as Bond shows, is an especially strange
concept. The entire problem of modern political theory is an
essentially false one: how do separate individuals, with their
own self-generated and self-legitimating desires and
interests, gather together into a social and political order?
The obvious observation that there could never have been a
time when people were not parts of a social order seems to
be disregarded. The “individual” had to be “chipped off” of
the social order in which any individual is integrally
embedded so as to stand alone, and Bond shows the
process through which this occurred, first of all in the
Protestant theology of “Sola Scriptura,” then in the
epistemology and political thought of early modern thinkers
like Descartes and Hobbes, and, finally, as the bearer of ever
more complicated and rapidly changing “rights” in the
postmodern West. Bond charts the way in which each step
in this development involved one power center invoking a
more discrete individual in order to break down some
intermediary institution that interfered with the process of
centralization desired by that power center. Even so-called
“identity politics,” supposedly focused more on groups than
individuals, is, Bond points out, organized through rights
granted to individual members of those groups and
deployed against the authority of intermediary institutions.
We can see that the more the individual comes to be seen as

separate from any social ties, and stands alone as a
psychological, moral and legal subject, the more
comprehensively regulated the individual is by the state. So,
for example, same-sex marriage is presented as a new
frontier in individual liberties and equality (liberal notions of
freedom, equality and rights all depend upon liberal
anthropology), while providing for more unrestrained
interventions on the part of government into the ways
businesses are run, the way parents can raise their children,
the way adoption services can determine suitable
candidates, and the ways schools can discipline and educate
the children they are responsible for. It’s hard to see how one
could dispute this, or that this is the case with the other
rights revolutions, especially those concerning sex and race.
Bond lays out a carefully documented account of why this is
the case, and why these concepts and these political
developments make far more sense according to the
Jouvenelian model, as opposed to self-celebrating Whig
histories. Once you have seen Bond’s account, say, of the
way in which various state and supposedly private but
actually “para-state” actors (like corporately established
foundations) orchestrated the civil rights movement for what
were really geo-political purposes (taking away a Soviet
“talking point” in the Cold War competition for the allegiance
of the newly decolonized states), you cannot “unsee” it. One
awaits the Jouvenelian dissection of other sacred concepts
of liberalism, in particular the “market” (which Bond briefly

touches upon in his chapter on the corporation, and
tangentially in his discussion of the use of money in ancient
Greek democracy), and one suspects that very little of what
liberal citizens and the vast majority of liberal intellectuals
take for granted will be left in intact.
If Bond’s book can induce thinkers within GA to rethink
liberal concepts, the main question to be faced will be, how
do we understand the concept of the Center? We assume
the center of the originary scene; that this scene of ritual and
distribution is eventually “usurped” by the Big Man; that the
occupation of the center by a human figure continues
through the ages of kingship and the gigantic ancient
empires, with very few and not very successful exceptions
(and perhaps only apparent exceptions) up until the
emergence of modern liberalism and democracy. So, at this
point, is there a social center, occupied or unoccupied? At
certain points in his thinking, Eric Gans has proposed a post-
Christian, which is to say post-sacrificial, omnicentric market
order that would eschew any single center, perhaps most
explicitly in the penultimate paragraph of Originary Thinking:
“[t]he historical movement of descralization operates neither
through the endless deconstruction of the originary center
nor through its definitive rejection, but through its
omnicentric multiplication. Even ‘decentralization’ is a
dangerous term; what is required is rather the universal
proliferation of centers—every human being a center” (219).

It is not clear to me how much this should be taken to be
prospective rather than descriptive. After all, every country
on earth has a president, prime minister or king (indeed,
absent such figures, there could be no “international
relations”); every country has a political capital, while most
have other, economic and/or cultural capitals. Is it possible to
speak of an individual as his/her/xir own center without that
individual being amply provided with the armor of protective
rights? And is it possible to think about rights without
thinking about a highly centralized state enforcing those
rights? In an omnicentric order (in what sense would it be an
order?), would Hamden, Connecticut, have to be as central
as Washington, D.C. and New York? If omnicentrism is to
accommodate asymmetries between centers, how would
that be different than saying that there is a social or final
center, with other centers dependent upon that one? If, in
fact, there is always a center, and it is always occupied by a
human, however often that human is replaced or how much
resentment is encouraged towards him/her/xir, then we
would have to speak of the mimetic field of desires and
resentments in the contemporary world very differently than
we do now.
Bond’s book is mainly ground clearing, which is very
important because there is a lot of ground to clear—it might
better be called Augean stables cleaning. He provides a
power analysis of the most cherished concepts of liberalism

—precisely those concepts which operate effectively and
serve power because they seem to be power-free. Once
“individual,” “rights,” “equality,” “liberty” and the rest lose
their self-evidence, many other concepts upon which the
legitimation of institutions depend will be fatally
compromised. We may be able to imagine a social order in
which, when people hear the word “individual” made central
to an argument they immediately think of what power play is
being set in motion while nothing else really changes. That
is, we can imagine a book like Bond’s merely ramping up the
widely shared cynicism to 11: “you speak of rights because
you want me to...” Bonds refers to Alasdair MacIntyre’s
critique, in particular in After Virtue, of liberal morality and
liberal social sciences—in its way as destructive to liberal
ontology as Bond’s Jouvenelian analysis—and MacIntyre’s
reconstruction of a morality that would presuppose the
embeddedness of the individual in a web of social
obligations, but a Jouvenelian approach would need a more
sustained engagement with MacIntyre than we see here.
Bond’s concluding discussion of future prospects for
beneficial change within the existing global liberal (dis)order
is appropriately tentative—Bond is well aware that he’s
initiating a discussion, not concluding one. Still, these
concluding reflections are interesting—Bond points to the
need and the possibility, given contemporary technology, of
developing spaces for social thought outside of the liberal

dome to take place. He also suggests, rather provocatively
given the anti-globalizing and re-localizing tendencies of
much of dissident (such as alt-right) right-wing thought,
that, since liberal theoretical projects of de-centralization
have been the most effective means of centralization,
perhaps the deeply resented processes of centralization,
often called “globalism,” will have to be more positively
engaged:
[p]aradoxically, it would seem that a clear recognition and
acceptance of this centrality could prove to be the more
effective means by which this centralisation can be
negotiated. The act of formalising the relationships currently
in existence would logically lead to a reduction in the need
for centralised power centres to engage in the Jouvenelian
mechanism to shape a given order. With a clear recognition
of the validity of this central power altering orders as
necessary, the warping effect of power in all areas of
existence would be better accounted for, and a more
coherent and possibly non-coercive order could be
instituted. (162)
A formalist politics, which, rather than protesting against
existing power relations by evoking some pre-political liberal
notion of freedom or equality, simply acknowledges existing
power relations and makes them formal, official, and
therefore accountable, is indeed the logical conclusion of

Bond’s Jouvenelian model.
But while an acceptance of the necessity of power and
hierarchy could be expected to have a pacifying effect and
to make the social order more reasonable, the need to think
through questions of obligations and reciprocities would not
only remain, but would pose itself in new ways. Here is
where an open field for developing originary moral and
ethical thought lies. Morality would have to be thought of in
“vertical” rather than “horizontal” terms—that is, there is no
reciprocity that is not mediated by a center. Mimetic rivalry
always concerns some object, however distant, abstract, or
illusory it might be, and that object is always framed by some
authorized way of seeking to appropriate it. If we think about
resentment less in terms of sheer inequality (which doesn’t
make much sense because there’s clearly no
correspondence between “degrees” of inequality and
“intensity” of resentment) and more in terms of the resented
other’s violation of the authorized way of appropriating the
desired object, then resentment always directly references
some failure (perceived or real) of authority. That is,
resentment is always directed towards some disregard of the
center. The reconstruction of moral thought around the
notion of “reciprocity,” then, would repudiate accusations of
the other as desiring centrality in favor of insisting that the
other fulfill the responsibilities implicit in the centrality
claimed. The moral model, then, is not realized person to

person, but by reference to our shared acceptance of the
center upon which we model our actions.
I hope everyone interested in GA will read Nemesis. At the
very least, it will give us something new to talk about, and
hopefully provide a touchstone for testing the uses and
effects of liberal concepts within GA. The prevailing narrative
within GA, that draws a line from the retrieval of the originary
intuition of equality-on-the-scene by the Christian revelation
to modern liberal democracy and market society[1], needs to
be challenged. Perhaps it will withstand the challenge and
emerge stronger. After all, no version of GA accepts the
liberal ontology which presupposes a pre-social individual—
GA tends to see liberal individualism in more Hegelian terms,
as the result of an evolution whereby individuals are formed
and enriched as post-sacrificial moral centers. What, exactly,
sustains them as moral centers, though? How much does
this conception of the individual continue to rely upon
liberally derived notions of rights and equality? At any rate,
taking up arguments like those advanced in Nemesis will be
unavoidable if GA is to have anything to say to emerging
political alignments in a world in which World War 2 and the
Cold War are really over and questions of authority and
political identity come to be scrutinized in increasingly
unfamiliar and radical ways.
Nemesis is published by Imperium Press, which “was

founded in 2018 to supply students and laymen with works
in the history of rightist thought.” Imperium has focused
primarily on the republication of classic works, like Robert
Filmer’s Patriarchia, Joseph de Maistre’s The Generative
Principle of Political Constitutions, and Fustel de Coulanges’
The Ancient City, with contemporary introductions. I believe
that Nemesis is the first new book Imperium has published,
and its publication is a good sign that other contemporary
writers thinking outside of liberal terms might find a home.
Works Cited
Gans, Eric. Science and Faith: The Anthropology of
Revelation, 2
nd
 Edition. (Aurora, CO:                        Noesis
Press, 2015)
⸻-. Originary Thinking: Elements of Generative
Anthropology. (Stanford, CA: Stanford                   University
Press, 1993)
Jouvenel, Bertrand de. On Power: Its Nature and the History
of Its Growth (New York: Viking                 Press, 1949).
MacIntyre, Alasdair C. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory.
(Notre Dame: University of Notre              Dame Press, 2007.)
Notes

[1] A concise formulation of this trajectory can be seen in a
footnote of Gans to Science and Faith: The Anthropology of
Revelation: The modern market-system, as exemplified by
contemporary “consumer society,” is a system that
generates ever more elaborate means of differentiating
among its members.  Although resentment is certainly not
abolished, each individual is taught by the market-system to
treat all others as equally unique individuals. Imperfect as it
is even as an abstract model, highly differentiated consumer
society (and not the uniformized utopias of socialism) is the
historical realization of the decentralization of the Gospel
utopia: the most moral society for the greatest number. (106)