

Originary Technics
A paradoxical effect of the spread of writing was to produce
a conception of the self as constituted by an inviolable
interiority: the subject who speaks (really, reads and
continues the "voice" of the text) silently to himself prior to
any entrance into the social arena. This subject is not only
pre-social, and therefore in a direct relation to God, the Idea,
or Truth, but pre-technical and therefore the originator and
user of technology from a position external to the
technological world itself. Whether in the form of the subject
of the free market or technocracy, this imaginary
presupposes the possibility of mastery over technology,
which, like the environment itself through technology, can be
subordinated to purposes formulated within an intellectual
space unaffected by the technology to be subjugated. This
is why talk of the relation between humans and technology
so often takes on the form of utopian projections predicated
upon humans finally attaining absolute mastery over the
machine world or dystopian nightmares in which the
technology comes to master us.
There is a tradition of more sophisticated thinking about
technology, including thinkers like Lewis Mumford, Gilbert
Simondon, and Bernard Stiegler, which sees humans and
technology as co-constitutive. If we can see humans and
technology as "always already" interdependent and

reciprocally defining, we can dispense with lurid fantasies
and learn to take responsibility for ourselves as technological
beings. I think there is a difficulty in doing so, though, that
I've only seen Mumford address but in his case more, I think,
as a "deviation" than a constitutive feature of technology: its
intrinsically hierarchical and asymmetrical structure. It's easy
to imagine technology being mastered by "Man" because
some men are always mastering technology and through it
other men. It seems to me impossible to imagine equal and
spontaneous contributions to the technological order by all
involved, which is why the only form of equality that seems
imaginable in any detailed way in a technological order is
that of equally "dehumanized" "cogs" of the machine. It's
different in scientific, laboratory settings, where everyone
can be working on parts of a larger problem without anyone
knowing in advance how any of the parts will fit into a larger
whole—insofar as something is to be built, though, in a
specific place, under the authority of someone, at a specific
time, drawing upon materials and manpower that must be
marshalled, the uneven distribution of leadership and power
is inevitable—some one takes charge. We are dealing here
with imperatives—which supports, I think, the claim that
technology is prior to science, which really enters the scene
when technology fails or needs supplementation,
subsequently acquiring a degree of autonomy from direct
technological application.

Here, I will proposing that taking a particular speech act, the
imperative, as the origin of technology, will provide a
powerful way of thinking technology and the human in a
conjoined manner and in a way, furthermore, that sees
technology as having an intrinsically ethical and moral
component, rather than being a neutral phenomenon that
takes on ethical implications only in the "uses" we "choose"
to make of it. We can ask, why are there imperatives? The
imperative, on the face of it, seems to be the human speech
act closest to animal interaction: after all, while we don't see
animals "explaining" things to each other, we do see one
animal submit to another and do what the other wants. It
would be easy to imagine that language originates with the
imperative. But that would be to confuse exercises of
dominance with meaningful linguistic acts: what
characterizes an imperative is precisely that it can extend
beyond the physical presence of both parties to the speech
act and can therefore be delayed and transformed: the two
parties must already "understand" each other in order to
ascertain whether the imperative has in fact been obeyed.
This understanding must come before the issuance of an
imperative, which means that the first speech act must
institute this understanding—that is, it must be reciprocal
and symmetrical, with all parties involved acknowledging
that the sign issued by the others is same sign as the one
issued by oneself. The most parsimonious way of

hypothesizing the emergence of such a sign is as the
conversion of another gesture but not quite sign into the
reciprocally recognized one. So, we presuppose a common
object, desired by all, with the desire of each mimetically
multiplied by the desire of the others, so that the
impossibility of any fulfilling that desire becomes apparent,
in which case the gesture of appropriation, the grasping of
the central object, is aborted, and converted into gesture of
deferral, which means something like: the being at the
center wants none of us to have it. This is the originary
hypothesis proposed by Eric Gans, which I think I can
assume just about anyone reading this has some familiarity
with. This first sign is an "ostensive" sign, which means it
says nothing "about" anything, it just indicates and
preserves mere presence. Think of the kinds of expressions
we use to alert others to an emergency situation—"fire!";
"man overboard!"—and you get the idea. Before anything
can be done or examined, our attention must first of all be
fixed on this thing.
In the sequence of the emergence of the speech forms, as
hypothesized by Gans, the imperative follows the ostensive.
In that case, we might say that technology, insofar as we
derive it from the imperative, is not quite co-originary with
the human, which we take to be founded with the ostensive.
But the Being who will issue the imperatives around which
the increasingly complex human community will be

organized has already interposed its will between the
community and its object of desire. Still, this Being does not
issue the first imperative which, according to our hypothesis,
was the result of an "inappropriate ostensive": someone
proclaims or "signs" the name of some object in its absence,
and his interlocutor fetches it: since this can be repeated, we
have a new speech form, which can be issued deliberately.
The imperative speech act is an intrinsically asymmetrical
one, even if not in any obvious way: pleading, praying,
petitioning, and so on are also performed through
imperatives, by a subordinate or, at least, the weaker party in
that case. There is another feature of the imperative worth
noting here: since the performance of the imperative must
conclude with an ostensive acknowledgement or affirmation
by the "imperator," the imperative further implies a relation
of supervision and, even more, instruction or pedagogy—to
see that the imperative is carried out as ordered requires,
eventually, that the one issuing the order walk through it step
by step, repeatedly, with the one to carry out the order—this
is at least always an implicit possibility in any imperative.
Here is where I would locate the origins of the technical—in
this intimate, fallible, highly interactive instrumentalization of
one party by the other. And we can already detect an ethics
of the technical here: this kind of intensive pedagogy has the
goal of enabling the "recipient" of the imperative to carry out
the imperative with ever diminishing supervision, precisely
so that the range of imperative ordering can expand.

Since the ritual center, the materialized memory of the
originary event, is by far the most important element of
communal life, whether the imperative emerged on the ritual
scene or not it would quickly become a prominent feature of
the scene. That is, the center would become the source of
imperatives. The nature of these imperatives would be to
construct the ritual scene in such a way as to solicit further
imperatives from the center, and to submit imperatives to the
center in turn. Everything that serves the community—
sources of food, shelter, victory over other groups, but
above all the minimizations or elevation of conflicts within
the community itself—is a gift of the center. It is the center
or, if we want to "demystify" a little, those capable of
listening authoritatively to the center, that secures all these
benefits. In exchange, the center wants a part of the goods
of the community, like a part of the buffalo meat that the
buffalo god/ancestor has provided us with. The logic of
human community, until very recently and least residually
still, is sacrificial. But the imperatives of the center also
concern the structure of ritual, which is very important,
because it is through ritual that the group enacts the events
that have formed the bond between the community and the
central Being, and this must be done very precisely to avoid
offending the gods and maintain the relationship of
imperative exchange: the will of the gods can only be heard
through the structuring of ritual.

The imperatives from the center under a ritualistic order,
then, are overwhelmingly concerned with what we could call
the design of the ritual scene. This would involve the use of
natural objects, the manufacture of specialized objects, and
the arrangement of members of the community on the scene
in specific ways. The emergence of technics, on this
account, is the development of this imperative exchange
between the community and the center: the community
petitions the center for help, and the center commands
certain practices in exchange for such help. This help is not
always forthcoming, or easy to recognize, which generates
narratives of happenings on the central stage, which
becomes densely populated with mythic beings whose
stories are told and woven into rituals. Insofar as activities
organized primarily through imperatives takes place off the
ritual scene (hunting and gathering, warfare, etc.) it will be
modeled on the ritual scene and likewise "covered" with
ritual and myth—and, with the kind of pedagogical or
apprentice-like relation I said above must accompany the
imperative speech act from the beginning. This is
"technological" in the sense that implements are created
and used, but also in the sense that the ritualized order is a
way of making things happen in a broader sense: it
"conjures" relationships and actions into being. When
modern artists like Richard Wagner aimed at creating a "total
work of art," it was the totalization of the ritual scene they
were hoping to recreate on modern terms.

The construction of specifically human tools itself depends
upon the ability to represent a series of steps, which in turn
depends on the capacity to narrate, and therefore upon the
fully developed language we find in the declarative sentence,
with a subject and predicate, suited for describing things out
there in the world. The declarative itself, in Gans's
hypothetical deduction of the sequence of speech forms, is
tightly bound up with the imperative: to keep it simple, for
now, we can see the origin of the declarative in the
countering of one imperative with another incompatible with
it, with the subsequence reconciliation of the two in a
"reality" that includes them both and that neither party can
control. If you ask me for a knife, and I say something like
"knife went," and you, rather than aggressing against me for
"disobeying" your command, accept that the knife isn't there
(which in an imperative world could only be represented as
the knife being commanded to be elsewhere), we have a
declarative sentence, insofar as we can refer to something
absent. The declarative allows for the representation of a
sequence of acts, for correction, and for recourse to models
to measure one's work against. It allows us to construct, in
advance, a stereotyped sequence of events in which the
request for a knife will always lead to one being provided.
The imperative can continually be prolonged, so that the
request for a knife can be extended into the command to
create a knife, and to do so in accord with certain
procedures and in accord with precise specifications. The

imperative, in this case, is issued from a higher level in the
social order and is split and "delivered" to its "imperatees"
through an increasingly complex set of relays. To demand a
knife becomes the demand for the production of knives in a
regimented manner as well as the demand to produce those
who can make and use knives. With the ever expanding
design of the scene, the designers are themselves designed
in such a way as to sustain the system of design.
For imperatives to be issued from a higher level within the
social order there needs to first be a higher level of the social
order. This can only be the case once the ritual center is
occupied by a human, who seizes or usurps it in what would
have been the first "revolutionary" act in human history. The
first to do this was the adventurer anthropologists know as
the "Big Man," but the Big Man, through a long history we
need not address here, becomes the sacred king and some
of the sacred kings become "God-Emperors," ruling over
vast territories and peoples, in a more or less divinized form.
The sacrificial center continues to exist through these
transformations, but it gets weakened and pluralized—the
imperial subjects may bring their sacrifices, whether cattle or
first-born children, to the temple in the capital, once a year,
but otherwise they will be engaged in exchange with local
and familial deities. Even more important, with the rise of the
gigantic empires, we see the creation of masses of people
conquered, enslaved, and torn out of any relation to the

sacred. These slave armies can be completely and
mercilessly "instrumentalized," in the form of what Mumford
called the "mega-machines" of antiquity, and which
probably represent the first approximation to what we would
readily recognize as "technology": extensive division of labor
applied to projects well beyond the capacity of individuals or
small groups. From this initial technology, predicated upon
total command, we can derive the axiom that all technology
is governance. Within any technological order, the machines
will be modeled on and complement the activities of human
collectives, while human collectives will be modeled on
actual or possible machinic articulations.
My hypothesis here, then, is that the bursting of technology
beyond the bounds of ritual that we have seen since, say, the
Renaissance, can still be described as scenic design without
the ritual scene. The breaking of ritual constraints is
equivalent to the weakening beyond repair of the sacrificial
order, which is to say the absence of any sacrificial center.
All the engineering feats and the reconstruction of society
around massive systems of sensing, measuring, energy
extraction, refinement, circulation and deployment in various
forms of automated movement and, now, the enormous data
collection and algorithmic ordering that commands all the
rest, can still be described as the ongoing perfection of a
system of imperative relays constructing a scene in which
any transformation in one section of the scene "demands"

some corresponding transformation in others. Those who
design technology are quite literally, if indirectly, telling
others what to do: you must go from one place to another,
and you must do it in one of these several ways. There is
always a tendency to reduce the options so as to optimize
the system imperatives. The most perfect technology, in that
case, would be one in which the designers at various levels
would compel a single activity from each subsequent or
simultaneous operator all the way down to the end user.
These single activities might be quite complex and require a
high level of skill, discipline and concentration to complete.
But if there is no more ritual center, on whose behalf, in what
system of exchange, is all this frenzied building taking place?
The answer is simple: on behalf of that which replaced the
ritual center: the state. And since states serve no sacred
order higher than themselves, but are rather subordinated to
a ever evolving and incoherent set of imperatives deriving
from such demands as "democracy," the "will of the people,"
"liberty," the "constitution," "human rights," "equality,"
"health," "the market," and so on, the gathering power of the
state drives technological advance while simultaneously
providing scope for all kinds of sabotage. That technology
can be both a "bane and a blessing" is a commonplace, but
perhaps we can move beyond that and beyond humanist
invocations of the need to "choose" (as if Humanity is a
deliberating agent) according to some vaguely specified but

likely residually sacrificial mode of morality. How do we even
say whether a particular technological development is
"good" or "bad," "harmful" or "helpful," or a bit of both?
To d a y   w e   s e e   d i s p u t e s   o v e r   w h e t h e r   t h i s   o r   t h a t   i n n o v a t i o n   i s
even "real." Rather than reiterating the demand (issued by
and to whom, exactly?) to make "technology" conform to
this or that externally established standard, we would do
better to think through technology as scenic design and the
perfection of the imperative within the framework of
technology as a form of governance within which we are all
always already designed and designers, albeit in ways that
are highly differentiated and asymmetrical.
I would begin with the simple question of how one knows
one has done something. If you paint your house, but it rains
immediately after and washes all the paint away, you haven't
really "painted your house"—that is, painting your house
includes, as a practice, accounting for the conditions under
which the paint will stay on the house. So, we can think of a
practice as an activity that includes the criteria for
determining whether the activity has been carried out and
completed not only as planned, but in a way recognizable to
others familiar with the norms and expectations governing
that activity. Here, of course, I'm speaking in a way deeply
indebted to Alasdair MacIntyre and, through him, thinkers
like Aquinas and Aristotle. So, I'm participating in the
retrieval of the kind of "virtue ethics" demolished by

modernity. MacIntyre includes more in his understanding of
what a social practice entails, such as the narration of one's
activity as part of a tradition that one participates in
knowingly, carrying it forward and revising it, as well as the
practice being one that presupposes and contributes to
forms of exchange and collaboration within a community. I
would slightly revise this tradition by bringing it to what I
think is a finer point, and one only conceivable under
technologized conditions: the marker of the further
perfection of your practice is the selection, more or less
explicitly, depending on the practice, of the successor of
your practice, the one who will continue and further perfect
it. In that case, the question of a successor (and a
predecessor) is built into the practice itself—you could
define a practice in terms of the singularization of the one
who will succeed it. Succession is, again more or less
explicitly, always staged: in your practice you seek out,
contract with, audition, train, create pathways for, the one
(you always want to narrow it down to one) who will succeed
you. Even more: you want to select the one who will in turn
be best suited to select his own successor, and in turn his
own successor, and so on. The foundation of any practice, in
that case, is what I am calling "singularized succession in
perpetuity." Whatever is involved in considering the
conditions that might prepare a wide enough range of
suitable candidates, available resources, training, public
recognition and acceptance, even participation in practices

of succession—all that is part of the practice, however
important it might be to explicitly thematize one element or
another.
This understanding of practice implies a particular kind of
social order, one in which precisely this kind of continuity is
staged from the top down, so that a central and particularly
visible part of governance is practices of succession carried
out by whoever is responsible for maintaining the entire
system of succession. After all, if governing is a practice, and
to be genuinely governing involves issuing imperatives that
are obeyed in ways that are recognizable as the imperatives
actually issued, then the most certain way to ensure that
governance is enacted is to have the practice of succession
in the hands of the governor: if someone else is to choose
the successor, then whoever that is has ample means for
interfering in ongoing practices of governance. Only a ruler
who can see to the continuing perfection of his practices of
rule in perpetuity can be said to be ruling. Ruling involves
ruling through technology ,so it is ordered governance,
which means continuity at the center, which comprises
scenic design. In this way, we can also account for a post-
sacrificial center, which is to say, a center to which the ruler
is obedient but which nevertheless cannot be deployed by
saboteurs to undermine his rule for "non-compliance" with
it. Singularized succession in perpetuity obeys the primary
imperative, rooted in the originary event itself, or "linguistic

presence," to ensure the continuity of the center and the
alignment of the community with it. Meaningful practices are
meaningful in the literal sense of being linguistic enactments
which offer "proof" of the words, sentences and texts one
produces in the constellation of all around the center implicit
in the completion and succession of one's practices. This
entails enacting the social roles privileged by the community,
whether they be familial, occupational, or civic, and all of
which, if not having one true, fixed meaning, are constituted
by a set of possible "falsifications" and "verifications" that
qualified observers can respond to from within their own
practices. The sacred is rerouted to the significant—doing
things that mean something in the sense that someone
could follow up on them in ways that you would recognize as
a follow up—which it was always conjoined with anyway.
There is nothing utopian in this social logic because it also
describes what everyone is already trying to do, even if it
tends to be most explicit in families where parents want their
children to grow up to be more or less better versions of
what the parents imagine they'd be growing up to become
under those conditions, and to have children who in turn...
Political leaders, in proportion to their strength as leaders,
select and promote successors who will continue their
agenda; any conscientious worker in any industry
whatsoever wants to attract and train those who will
continue and improve the work; an artist wants to establish a

new tradition of that kind of art, or to continue in such a way
that will enable others to continue, that form of art, and so
on. In fact, it is bureaucrats who are least able to stage
succession because they must display obedience to
anonymous procedures that explicitly take such staging out
of their hands—so, they can only stage succession in
underhanded ways. So, the best way to participate in the
imperative order is to exemplify, encourage in others, and
make more explicit singularized succession in perpetuity. I
haven't emphasized this, but such practices also involve
some form of homage to one's predecessors, those whom
one has been selected by, or whom one wants to prove
oneself worthy of being retroactively "adopted" by. This
theoretical approach won't necessarily tell you directly what
do with or about Twitter, Facebook, Google, Apple, etc.—
such a theory is more for readying you to listen for
imperatives than to issue them. But I would issue the soft
imperative to, even if it goes against the grain, embrace the
narrowing of options I suggested above: whatever you are
building, you want it to be the one thing you need to build in
order to obey the command to install singularized
succession in perpetuity across the social order—and, you
want what you build to issue such a command as well,
broadcast and ramified as far as you can send it. Imperatives
that are built to last will narrow things down but also open
things up, insofar as the imperative interferes and is
interfered with by others, requiring continual hypothesizing

and refinement. (This also means that if you're wrong, you're
generating the practices that will reveal that.) It's hard to
imagine anything more powerful than participating in a
command structure traceable back to the origins of
humanity and stretching forward to indefinite human
continuance, nor any more compelling program of study
than to identify everything worthy of continuation in our
practices, and what perfection of those practices would
most likely ensure that continuation. Rather than standing
outside of technology and determining what use we want to
put it, we participate in technology as a mode of revelation of
our planetary destiny.