Power and Paradox
Adam Katz

The liberal world order presents itself as a vast mapping of
“rights.” No political or social question can be discussed
without being framed in terms of “rights”—someone’s rights
being violated, or recognized, or clashing with some other
set of rights. Even when we speak of “balancing” rights
against some other imperative, like stability, prosperity or
order, we are still speaking about balancing one set of rights
against another, for terms like “stability,” “prosperity” and
“order” merely represent the rights individuals have to be
protected from violence, or to have their pensions paid on
time and in full, to have a job, and so on. If, through some
globally imposed Oulipian constraint, we were forbidden to
use the word “rights” in discussing public events, no one
would have the slightest idea of what to say.

The saturation of our political discourse by “rights” has been
noted for generations—one of the better known dissections
was Mary Ann Glendon’s 1991 Rights Talk. The concern of
those critical of rights talk has usually been that it
marginalizes an older discourse of virtue, community and
responsibility that once prevailed in Western polities. This is
no doubt true, but at least as important is the thoroughly
paradoxical nature of “rights.” If there are to be rights, they

must be enforced, by some agency large enough to enforce
them without hindrance. The state, naturally. The more rights
we discover, acknowledge, and demand enforcement of, the
more powerful and unhindered the state must be. If we are
talking about “international human rights,” we must therefore
be speaking of a state, or states, capable of exercising
imperial control over other states: to compel other states to
enforce the rights in question, and to remove their
governments if they can’t or won’t.

In that case, when we are speaking about rights, we may
believe we are looking to the uniqueness and dignity of each
individual, in an ever more refined and sensitive way; what
we are in fact doing is imagining enhanced forms of
sovereignty. We can put this very bluntly. If rights need to be
defended, they need to be defended against someone.
When we posit a right, or advocate for one, then, we are
imagining a state willing and ready to act against specific
people assumed to be potential violators of that right. Each
new right conjures a state with more and longer tentacles.
When one advocates for homosexual rights, one imagines a
state willing to act against those who will violate those rights
—who will not hire homosexuals, who will not rent or sell to
them, who will assault them, who will murder them. If the
state is to be ready to act against some people, it must have
some idea who they are; at any rate, in the process of
enforcing the right certain profiles will emerge. The state,

and all those acting in conjunction with the state, can say
who they are on the watch for: “homophobes.” The entire
victimary bestiary of homophobes, racists, sexists,
transphobes, xenophobes and so on are nothing more than
“superstructural” or “ideological” projections of the
sovereignty necessarily imagined by rights talk.

I have not forgotten that the first calls for rights were for
rights against the state. There is something paradoxical in
the first consistent articulation of rights that exist separate
from and prior to the state, that of Hobbes: the most basic
right, that of life, and therefore of self-defense, so that one
has the right to defend one’s life even against the state (so,
the prisoner on death row being taken to execution has no
obligation to go peacefully), leads to the first argument for a
state to which nothing is forbidden, except perhaps
disregard for its own survival, which really just means the
right to self-defense of the sovereign himself. If the
individual is to surrender all rights (except self-defense in
the last, hopeless, resort) in order to have his most
fundamental right defended more effectively by the
sovereign, he must accept a sovereign that is capable of
doing anything, anytime, to anyone.

Hobbes was at least consistent enough to realize that you
cannot have rights against the state. The “laborist” argument
for rights introduced by Locke initiated the tradition of

positing rights against the state, limiting its powers. This is
the argument that has, of course, been institutionalized and
venerated in the United States, and we still see significant
vestiges of this argument among American conservatives,
and more than vestiges when it comes to the defense of gun
rights. So, it might appear as if this original, “classical liberal”
understanding of rights has been distorted by later victimary
rights claims: this distinction is what the argument over
“equality of opportunity vs. equality of outcomes” and
“negative vs. positive rights” comes down to. But it’s not
really the case that advocates of these rights stood outside
of any entanglements with the state, and just wanted to be
left alone to add their labor to various pieces of nature
surrounding them. They wanted the state (first of all a
liberalizing monarchy) to be deployed against the Church,
aristocracy and other privileged groups, such as
corporations chartered by the state, independent towns,
banks, and guilds. It’s easy for us to overlook this, since the
most formidable of those entities either no longer exist (or
exist in a thoroughly neutered form), and few today could
muster any historical sympathy for them. But that just means
that we identify with the state that swept them into the
dustbin of history, or broke and trained them. The history of
the United States, meanwhile, the first modern society with
neither a monarchy or aristocracy, has been the history of
different groups trying to influence the state so as to defend
their rights against some other, “privileged” group.

Meanwhile, defending rights of free speech and bearing
arms generally involve trying to bring the state into your
quarrel with some local public authority, and whichever
groups support it. So, even the most “natural” of rights
involve using the state against one’s enemies.

If I am right, I am pointing to an enormous discrepancy
between what we are saying and what we are doing in our
rights talk—between the constative and the performative
effects of that talk. We can formulate the discrepancy as
follows: the more the distribution of goods and status is
centralized, the more vehemently we deny the existence of
any center. Are “rights,” then, real, and is advocacy for them
effective? Yes, they can be—the state can genuinely take the
side of one group of citizens against another. Beyond that
purely political consequence and the benefits that follow,
though (it is surely good to have the state on your side),
there is no correlation between an increase in rights and an
increase in other goods, like human dignity or human
flourishing. That is a very difficult claim to defend, of course
—or to refute: we would need to have some shared language
through which we can evaluate “dignity” and “flourishing.”
But we don’t have such a shared language, precisely
because the effect of the direct relation between state and
individual created by the system of rights makes any such
shared language impossible: any assertion of shared values
or virtues would inevitably privilege one group over others

and therefore be the ground for a claim that the former were
violating the rights of the latter. So, if we can agree that
being bereft of a shared language for discussing human
dignity and flourishing is itself detrimental to human dignity
and flourishing, then to that extent at least, I have made the
case.

I would also say that, on the face of it, the very discrepancy I
am pointing out subverts any claims that rights talk has
enhanced human existence. If rights talk has been so
beneficial, why must the obvious correlation between the
growth of the centralizing state and individual rights be so
overlooked? Why are the actual power relations obscured,
rather than celebrated? No group or individual has an
interest in an explicit statement of the facts: I do what I can
to use the state against those who obstruct or irritate me in
some way. Rights talk constitutes a virtually universally
shared, one might say “constitutive,” delusion that is
required for the perpetuation of the system. But the reliance
of a political order on hysterical and escalating delusions is
an indictment of that order. So, it might be worth the effort to
imagine a social order without “rights.”

If the most telling defect of rights talk is the denial of the
center behind vituperative claims that others wish to
possess it, it may be that renewed attention to the center
might provide a way of replacing “rights.” The originary

hypothesis involves a group of proto-humans surrounding a
central object; the emission of the originary sign generates,
out of that object, a sacred center that subsists even when
the object itself has been divided and devoured. If the
significant is ultimately the sacred, there can be no
significance without a center. We can take the relation to
some center to be constitutive of human being. In The End
of Culture, Eric Gans’s reconstruction of the center-
periphery relations subsequent to the originary scene
follows the succession of ostensive, imperative and
declarative cultures. What he shows along the way is that
the center as an agent is constructed prior to any agency on
the margins, with the latter form of agency being modeled
on that originally attributed to the center. In his analysis of
imperative culture, Gans notes that the memory of the
sacred object must conceive of that object as

a sacred being that exists above and beyond the concrete
manifestations it may take on. The “signified” of the
word/gesture of designation has thus become partly
independent of its referent. This independence is not merely
formal; the imperative is effective only insofar as it is
addressed to this “signified,” summoning it to be present.
Thus the sacred being in imperative ritual possesses, in the
eyes of the participants, an intentional ability to manifest
itself or not.

The asymmetry of the imperative is a step in the direction of
establishing symmetry between the sacred being and its
worshipers—in a word, of humanizing the sacred. The animal
images and masks that we may associate with the
imperative level of culture are in fact signs of a growing
anthropomorphism. This is the beginning of a development
with profound ethical consequences… The ethical
conception of the community depends no longer on the
mere ad hoc appearance of the sacred being but on the will
of a being whose judgment whether or not to manifest itself
in the rite reflects the real cohesion of the community. (115)

The sacred being at the center exists above and beyond any
of its concrete manifestations, it is addressed, it has
intentionality, it can choose to be present or not—before any
of these capacities are attributed to any of the members of
the community. The sacred being is “humanized” before the
humans are, it is anthropomorphized before there are
humans on which to model the non-human—the human
community takes on the attributes by modeling itself on the
sacred being it has modeled. The center precedes the
margin in every sense, and if agency on the margins was first
constructed by analogy with the agency attributed to the
center, it’s hard to see when that would have ceased to be
the case. So, my argument above that the presumably
individualizing insistence of rights is in fact a way of
imagining ever more comprehensive modes of sovereignty,

can, if anything, be formulated even more forcefully: any
time we designate an individual, event, or activity as
protected, in actuality or possibility, by the sovereign, we are
in fact modeling the agency of that sovereign. And there is
no individual, event or activity in a society governed by a
sovereign that could be intelligible other than as protected or
proscribed by the sovereign.

The agency of the center is constructed through the
ongoing interaction between center and margins. On the
originary scene, the center repulses the grasping of the
members of the group, compelling them to stand down. The
implication from the beginning is that once we have
signification, the center is irresistible: there is nothing
without the center, and a particular center can only be
replaced by another center. Within imperative culture, the
center-margin interaction proceeds through an exchange of
imperatives: the members of the community make requests
of the center, requests which must ultimately be reducible to
the request that the center make itself available; meanwhile,
the center issues orders to the members, orders which
themselves must be reducible to serving and preserving the
center. Any exchanges among the members themselves
generate new centers that ultimately “orbit” the sacred
center of the community: at the very least, if we are talking
about something, we share the same language, and we can
look at some object together without falling out, and must

therefore share a relation to a prior center. Finally, declarative
culture takes form in narrating and commenting on activities
taking place at the center, which involve the central figure
providing or failing to provide for the community, with an
increasingly complex system of discourse detailing all the
different ways the center and the periphery can serve,
betray, and disappoint one another. These are tales of the
resentment of those on the periphery toward the center. And
the secular discourses that emerge from mythological ones,
and that are able to place human, mortal figures at the
center, are modeled on the agency of the center, while
incorporating resentment at being denied centrality
themselves.

Gans has also argued that all resentment is ultimately
resentment of the center (“The center as unique locus of
significance is by this fact the focus of resentment,” “The
Centre,” Chronicle 579). Gans identifies such resentment as
being present on the originary scene itself, in the member’s
resentment of the center for not presenting itself, for being
unavailable while subsisting after the consumption of the
object. That all resentment is ultimately a form of resentment
towards the center is a difficult, but very illuminating
concept. If a friend, for example, takes advantage of my
friendship to advance himself at my expense at work or in
some community activity, isn’t it him, my friend, that I am
resenting, rather than the center? My focus certainly seems

to be on my friend: I want to tell him what I think of him, I
want to get back at him, I want others to know that I should
really be in his place. But all of those actions, whether
imagined or actually carried out, are actions that are
prohibited under normal conditions, and part of the reason I
fantasize about doing or doing them is precisely because
they are prohibited. You don’t say things to someone else
just for the sake of hurting them; you don’t interfere with the
operations of some shared activity for the sake of slaking
your own desire for revenge; you don’t indulge your vanity
when you are charged with public responsibility. The reason
you don’t do those things is that the center forbids them: all
moral commands forbidding such “sins” come from the
center. In that case, then, your resentment is, in fact,
directed toward the center: the center has failed to ensure
that the rules have been followed, and so you consider lifting
your obligation to follow those rules yourself. This
resentment might take the form of losing faith in God, or
becoming more cynical about civic institutions or leaders,
which is to say, those obliged to represent and preserve the
center.

The Big Man’s usurpation of the sacred center, in Gans’s
historical account perhaps the most revolutionary act in
human history, can be understood as evincing just such a
resentment of the center. The sacred center within the
egalitarian community could not provide due recognition of

the Big Man’s actual status. At the same time, the Big Man’s
usurpation resolves some crisis within the community—if the
Big Man were just acting on his own desire for centrality, he
would have no idea what to do once he acquired it. It was
either him or another contender, or an increasingly
destructive struggle amongst various contenders. The Big
Man knows, more or less consciously, that he must manage
the very resentment that enabled his own elevation,
resentment that will now be directed towards him.
Resentment within the community is now modeled on this
new mode of centrality—it is no longer directed towards the
absent center for not presenting itself, but towards the
occupant of the center precisely for occupying it and
thereby denying my own centrality (which I model on his).
We should note the paradoxical nature of this resentment,
which depends upon its object for self-definition: the more
the Big Man preserves his own centrality, the more I am
being denied my own. In archaic forms of sacred kingship,
this takes the form of conferring ever more significance upon
the king, who mediates between the community and the
cosmos; while at the same time making the king far more
vulnerable, as he is now responsible for any misfortune that
befalls the community, and can fairly easily be removed by
precisely the same kind of unanimous confrontation with the
center through which humanity first emerged.

We could hypothesize that this vulnerability led to the

establishment of more defensible forms of (still sacred)
kingship, which we could call “imperial.” The imperial king is
removed from the ostensive grasp of his community; in fact,
he rules over many communities, each with their own local
cults. His sacrality is more abstract, and less bound up with
the ebb and flow of everyday life. The ancient empires lasted
a very long time, in some cases millennia, and it’s worth
considering why they nevertheless vanished, never to be
recreated. They clearly weren’t viable past a certain point. If
we are to see the center as the final cause of social
developments, and the management of resentment toward
the center as the main problem of government, we must look
there to account for the limits of imperial sacral rule. Imperial
sacral kingship introduced two major innovations. First, the
conquest and subsequent mass enslavement and
conscription of entire populations; second the introduction
of money and trade, ultimately linked to the former (in
particular military necessities), but carried out by far more
elite layers of the population. We have, as part of the same
system, increasingly sophisticated institutions and therefore
conceptions of justice (giving to each “his due”), that make it
possible to distinguish between various forms of intention
and responsibility; and the generation of massive
organizations of human fodder, with sufficient excess
populations for the institution of large scale human sacrifice.
The incommensurability of these two interdependent
systems sets the stage for the cross-civilizational crisis

leading to what Karl Jaspers first called the “Axial Age.” (I am
indebted to David Graeber’s Debt: The First 5,000 Years
[Melville House: 2014] for this analysis.)

Resentment toward the sovereign center must come from
the elites: it’s impossible to imagine something like a slave or
peasant revolt in the ancient empires (and there were a lot of
them) without some form of elite sponsorship. Such
resentment would be located within the justice system, most
likely the upper echelons of that system, and would involve
some figure being treated “unjustly” in a very visible way.
Such injustice would be more visible if carried out against an
exemplary figure, someone relatively independent but
previously trusted by the sovereign, even a favorite, and a
figure capable of articulately framing his mistreatment in the
terms of abstract justice. All that would be necessary would
be to narrate such an event (which may, of course, have
happened many times, with a synthetic version ultimately
emerging) modeled on the imposition of social death and
human sacrifice upon the conquered population. This
exemplary individual sets himself apart, is ready to face
social death, to explain himself and to do so publicly. The
imperial sacral order would then become unviable, at least in
the long term, because there is now a new mode of self-
sacrificial sacrality that can address the crises produced by
sacral imperial rule. This new mode of sacrality can be
embraced by elites and the broader populace alike, and

would therefore be a pole of attraction for the new merchant,
priestly, and scribal classes (a more comprehensive account
would have to connect these developments to the
emergence of both money and literacy in the ancient world).
Defeats and failures attributable to the sovereign would
redound to the credit of the new, “Axial Age” sacralities,
gradually discrediting the system of sacrifice and the
divinities sanctioning it. For quite a while, though, this
counter-sacrality might serve to sharpen the tools of
imperial rule, as post-sacral, literate modes of thought can
be applied to the mechanisms of domination, public
manipulation, and war. Any viable form of governance must
be able to trace its origins back to some such dialectic.

Gans focuses on the Axial Age acquisitions Judaism and
Christianity, and sees their rejection of a sacrificial center
and creation of a universal morality as the basis for the
ultimate unfolding of liberal democratic market society. Each
individual becomes a center with liberalism and the market
model. Gans’s analyses of Romanticism, in which individuals
present themselves as universally excluded from society in
order to create a style or mode of being that enables them to
circulate within society (see, for example, Originary Thinking
164-171) lays the ground for his understanding of the
omnicentrism of liberalism. Gans makes perhaps his most
unequivocal claim along these lines in the conclusion of
Originary Thinking: “[t]he historical movement of

desacralization operates neither through the endless
deconstruction of the originary center nor through its
definitive rejection, but through its omnicentric
multiplication. Even ‘decentralization’ is a dangerous term;
what is required is rather the universal proliferation of
centers—every human being a center” (219). But as Gans
also recognizes, someone will always present him/herself
centrally first, so omnicentrism is as asymmetrical and the
modern market Gans theorizes in his essay “On Firstness”:
“market exchange maintains a permanent distinction
between production and consumption, creating a permanent
asymmetry between the consumer and the producer” (45),
creating new forms of resentment. The paradox of market
omnicentrism, then, is that it is the production system that
produces the very forms in which new centers, denouncing
that production system, are projected.

If this highly asymmetrical omnicentrism does not lead to
violence it must be because a powerful central state ensures
that it doesn’t: indeed, consider how strong and centralized
the state must be, and what a civilized political culture it
must have inculcated, for the romanticist and later modernist
cultural entrepreneurs to have flouted social norms so
blatantly not only with impunity but for fame and profit. It
should be mentioned that Gans does not often feel obliged
to refer to the state in conducting such discussions, and in
those cases rarely referring to its coercive and controlling

functions, relegating it to the role, essentially, of
redistribution, or addressing those resentments regarding
market asymmetries that might threaten the system.  Liberal
democracy is a kind of replication of the market model:

“[t]he liberal-democratic model is based on the regulation of
the economic market by a political system that shares the
quality of the market by bringing to bear collective
judgments rather than granting absolute powers to a tyrant
or self-perpetuating decision-making group. Freely
contested elections and political debate are essential to
allowing the various members of society to propose and
enact measures to assuage their resentments. (“Liberal
Democracy in Question,” Chronicle 562).

But if the political system works in exactly the same way as
the economic system, by aggregating individual choices into
a collective result that no one really chooses, why should it
not simply aggravate the resentments generated within the
market system? The voter is doing exactly the same thing as
the consumer: “purchasing” a piece of power from a
producer (the political party and its donors and patrons) in
order to express her resentment at being ignored by the
center. In the political sphere, it is even worse, because the
voters, far more openly than consumers, are choosing
against others, in order to frustrate and humiliate their rivals.
The system, as proposed here by Gans, can only work if the

“measures” proposed to “assuage” the resentments of the
various individuals and groups in the social order actually do
so. But why should we assume that those measures do, on
balance, “assuage”? They can only do so if they are
reasonable measures, effectively implemented, and if the
legitimacy of decisions made by those implementing is
accepted sufficiently to prevent the emergence of violent
factions. Does the democratic system provide ground for
assuming that any of this will be the case—that the
measures will be reasonable, that they will be monitored
beyond the minimal necessity of showing that a response
has been made to some highly publicized resentment, that
institutions and agencies are in place to implement the
measures effectively, that they will be accepted by those by
whom they must be accepted (rather than, for example,
taken as a down payment for the next set of measures)? If
the measures are actually implemented in such a way as to
assuage, it will be in spite of, not because of, democracy: it
will be because authority has been granted to institutions
that is not revocable on a regular basis. But if reasonable
measures can only be carried out by institutions placed, if
only by convention, beyond direct public accountability, how
is the functioning of those institutions improved by providing
them with the task of “assuaging” in the first place? In other
words, to the extent that governing institutions are trusted it
is insofar as much of their operation remains beyond the
reach of liberal and democratic demands, but this is what

liberalism and democracy are unable to accept. Everything
must eventually be politicized.

The role of governance in originary thinking must be framed
in terms of our understanding of resentment. There seems to
me in Gans’s discussions of resentment and the various
modes in which is gets “discharged” and “assuaged” in
liberal democracies an assumption about resentment that is
unwarranted by originary thinking itself. That assumption is
that the resentments we see in these societies are simply
the natural expression of unmediated resentments: it is
natural that blacks would resent whites, or “racism”; it is
natural that women would resent men, or “sexism” or
“patriarchy”; it is natural that homosexuals would resent…
and so on. The assumption is circular: because these
resentments have been given the most prominent and
explosive public expression, they are therefore the most
“real” and “authentic” ones. It is just as easy to see these
resentments as ones that have been opportunistically seized
upon and inflamed within a system of “rights” that invites
and even depends upon the perpetual stoking of
resentment. If liberalism and democracy are to be taken as
“natural” forms, including in the sense that they are “higher”
social forms than the monarchies that preceded them, then
these might very well be the most promising resentments for
political entrepreneurs to incite insofar as resentments will
be sorted out in accord with the order in which rights have

been allocated to various groups. But if allocating rights and
using them to deploy resentments against a social order
which was removed violently rather than “refuted” was in
fact the means by which liberalism and democracy were
installed in the first place, then this appearance of
naturalness dissolves. If resentment is always resentment of
the center, then the center must play a formidable, even
formative, role in shaping those resentments. Temporary
occupants of the center in a liberal democratic order will
promote those resentments that enable them to prolong
their stay at the center, while their opponents will promote
those that will enable them to take over the center
themselves. If the occupant of the political center, the
wielder of central power, has a far more permanent status,
he will have no need to hype potential resentments, and if
hope of displacing him is non-existent, neither will anyone
else. In other words, a central figure in a system without
rights would have more of an incentive to govern and allow
other institutions to perform their primary functions. There
would still be resentments—certainly an acceptance of the
originary hypothesis compels us to grant the constitutive
nature of human resentment—and we could also concede
that they will be directed toward the political center, but the
contents of the resentments will be radically different, and
far less conducive to violence. In a well governed order, the
form taken by resentments will be towards the failures of
institutions in fulfilling their primary function. Are managers

placing employees in the positions they are best suited for?
Do teachers maximize the learning potential of students? Do
producers provide products worthy of selective consumers?
Resentments along these lines, even when “irrational,” which
is to say driven by mimetic rivalry rather than an informed
estimate of the actual situation, will not be implicitly
insurrectional. They will be calls for more firmly and
intelligently exercised authority.

What generates power, and gives one person power over
others? Here as well we must think in terms of proximity to
the center. The first instance of human power was on the
originary scene, where a group of newly formed humans
collectively deferred their desire and allowed a new reality to
emerge at the center. This provides us with a model of
human power: creating realities by following the lead of the
object at the center of shared attention, rather than rivalrous
desires. Power is always differential because some members
of any group, in any situation, will exhibit greater powers of
deferral: they will be able to stop and examine a situation
while others are rushing in, and they will have the patience to
wait and see when the unfolding reality provides an opening
for action. To the extent that the group is successful, they
will follow those exhibiting a greater power of deferral, which
means those individuals will have the power, and, ultimately
a single individual will have the power because someone
must exhibit the greatest power of deferral. Power is an

interpretation of the demands of the center, and the center
can only demand one thing at a time: whoever best
articulates that demand governs, regardless of how close
others might have been to doing so. This need not exclude
all kinds of consultation, and an awareness of the needs and
resentments of others in the group will make the exercise of
power more steady and secure but I am making a kind of
absolute ontological claim here: whenever many act
together, we can identify a single leader who makes every
decision that counts. If common action seems consensual,
that just means that a strong sense of common goals and a
shared ability to set aside rivalries masks the fact that,
perhaps in a somewhat more subtle way, someone is taking
the lead at every point where a disagreement is possible; if
different people decide at different times, that means that
either group is changing configuration while there is always a
single head, or that the head has implicitly or explicitly
delegated decision making power to others or, perhaps, that
the group is in process of splitting up.

Power is therefore also a relationship: as soon as power is in
someone’s hands, he is obliged to continue to exhibit and
even enhance his powers of deferral. He is now responsible
for his fellows, and he must treat and respond to them as the
center would have him do, setting aside his own resentments
in the process. He must register and re-present their
resentments of him as occupant of the center: each will, at

times, believe that he or she could better play the central
role, and sometimes some of them may be right. The holder
of power has to convert these resentments into new forms of
cooperation, emulation and friendly competition. We are not
used to thinking of power this way, as earned leadership,
even if there’s no other way of explaining the earliest and still
most basic forms of informal hierarchy: liberal and
democratic attacks on the center encourage us to see power
as arbitrarily held until proven otherwise—and even the proof
is always considered provisional. But it must also be said that
most forms of power in the contemporary world don’t really
look like this—the occupants of power often attain their
positions through more or less subtle forms of violence,
deception and manipulation. But these degenerate forms of
power are only possible because social institutions once
founded on the kind of deferral Philip Rieff called “charisma”
have shaped the reality of the community so thoroughly that
only under the most extreme circumstances will abuses of
those institutions lead to their abandonment. Indeed, as I
have pointed out, only the creation of a new, equally viable
center could make such abandonment even thinkable. Such
is the necessity of the center, and such the power of the
memory of the founding of (especially) political institutions,
that there is indeed a great deal of ruin in a nation. And it
must also be said that even when the highest levels of social
institutions are held by those who exploit the credit of the
institution for personal or factional benefit, or short term

ends, much of the rest of the institution might be in the
hands of those still acting in accord with its primary purpose;
in this way, institutions can be maintained even through
disastrous leadership. For a while, at least.

Power must be distributed and transferred, and this can be
done only by those who hold power. The distribution of
power is also modeled on the originary event. Now, when we
think about a center, we think about a circle, and so we
imagine the members of the originary community arrayed
symmetrically equidistant from the central object. The first
ritual would most likely represent the event in this way, and
there would be extremely compelling reasons to maintain
this ritual form. But just as the order of deferral on the
originary scene must have been unequal, so must have been
the approach to the object in the sparagmos. Some
members of the group would manifest their deferral earlier
and more clearly; and some would eat more and take better
portions, just never so much as to re-ignite the mimetic crisis
at the origin of the event. But in order to ensure that no one
takes too much more, some members of the group would
have to intervene where conflicts seem to be getting out of
control. Those who get better portions might often be those
who then have to “adjudicate” between other members of
the group, since they are already assured of their part. The
adjudicators may very well have been those who deferred
first and were therefore deferred to. Any distribution of

power will likewise be uneven, as it must be guided by the
needs of following the commands of the center.

The transfer of power is the more difficult problem. Whoever
has seized the center may eventually become less fit than
others to wield that power, or at the very least must
eventually die. Here we see the paradox of power in its
fullest form. My analysis so far has suggested that power
must ultimately be held by a single member of the
community, who is in turn responsible for its distribution.
Needless to say, every new power holder does not revisit
every decision ever made on which person is to occupy
which position; rather, by allowing many, most, or all to
continue in their positions, he now takes responsibility for
the decisions that put them there in the first place and
demonstrates his faith in the judgment of those who
exercised power before him. Every member of the
community knows, more or less explicitly, that there must be
someone occupying the center, but part of the way each
knows this is through his resentments directed toward the
center. Those resentments will be at their most powerful
when there is uncertainty at the center, and therefore no
clear “framing” of those resentments. The transfer of power
is therefore that moment where both the sanctity of the
center and the power it confers is formalized and where
resentments toward the center are most “unbound.” The
formalization of power can quell those resentments by

referring back to previous framings and implicitly promising
their renewal, or it can make the attempted seizure of the
center all the more attractive in the knowledge that any
occupant can be sanctified by the same formalities.

The election of those who are to occupy positions at the
center is best seen as an attempt to resolve the paradox of
the transfer of power. Election was a common way of
choosing kings in primitive communities and was replaced
by hereditary rule once the kingdom became, through
conquest, the property of the king, which could therefore be
transferred like any other form of property. Sooner or later
there will be a situation in which there is no clearly eligible
heir, in which case violence becomes a very likely way of
settling the question of succession. The problems with
election run even deeper than that, though. Through
elections the power centers distributed throughout the
community become permanently antagonistic to each other,
and if there is no permanent occupant of the center, then the
state just becomes an instrument in the hands of one
faction, or coalition of factions, or the other, with every
incentive to make as much use of it as possible until it
passes back into the hands of your opponents.

That the temporary holder of power holds it on popular
sufferance is seen by democracy advocates as a virtue, but
in fact those without power can have no way of knowing how

those with power should use it. All anyone can know
authoritatively is the sphere of activity in which he
participates, along with the specific mode of power allocated
to him for that purpose. Elections formalize and make explicit
the dependence of the power holder on those he leads or
governs, but they do so in the worst possible way, outside of
the context of the responsibilities and powers of the subjects
themselves. The dependence of power upon its base is far
better formalized through modes of consultation through
which all members of the community act as eyes and ears of
the sovereign and communicate to him through established
channels. Finally, elections inevitably raise the question of
rights, first of all the right to vote: who should be allowed to
vote? What age is the cut-off? What about foreigners? The
introduction of rights talk means that any attempt to
establish a responsible, qualified, invested electorate will be
undermined and replaced by universal suffrage. Universal
suffrage seems to empower everyone maximally, but it just
ensures that no serious decisions can be left to be decided
by the electoral process, making it necessary to manage,
limit, deceive and ignore in turn the expressed desires of the
majority; indeed, the electorate gets turned into proxies of
those who actually exercise power, as they fight their battles
with their rivals, and themselves ultimately become
incapable of fulfilling the functions of an elite.

That still leaves the problem of power transfer unsolved. This

problem can’t be solved by some formal mechanism of
selection, since any formal method will be open to
interpretation and manipulation and, like any rule, must have
its exceptions. The problem is that the transfer of power
must involve initiation into power, which means that the
occupant of central power must take on the responsibility for
recruiting and initiating candidates for succession; but in
doing so will he not be raising potential rivals, of each other
as well as him, with no filial sympathy of obligation to the
sovereign but having been told by that sovereign that he
might be a worthy successor? The solution is to gear the
entire social order towards the resolution of the problem of
power transfer. The meaning of social life, the telos of the
social order, is to ensure the orderly transfer of power to the
worthiest successor. Every institution has its purpose, which
constitutes its center: to educate, to protect, to do research,
to produce some good or service, to excel in some activity.
In each case a power hierarchy is established in the way I
have been describing through my discussion of power—the
power hierarchy serves the end of the institution, which is
why it deserves the respect of the members. The purpose of
the sovereign is to ensure that all institutions maintain the
form of power proper to their respective purposes. In turn, all
institutions report to the sovereign and contribute to the
initiation of prospective successors, chosen by a process
overseen by the sovereign and no doubt institutionally
based, on the model of military academies, officer schools

and other highly selective elite-promotion institutions.
Obedience to the sovereign is sharply distinguished from the
contribution to the initiation of the candidates (the sovereign
always has a ranking recorded in case succession becomes
immediately necessary but is constantly revising the ranking
as a result of his oversight of the initiation process). Any
obedience to an order of the candidate, much less one
contradicting orders given by the sovereign, would stand
out, would be alarming, and would be immediately reported,
instantly disqualifying that candidate. The candidates don’t
give orders, in other words—a representative of the
sovereign gives whatever orders are necessary on their
behalf, as needed for the process of initiation. (Those
candidates never chosen to be sovereign can, of course,
play other highly valued roles as advisors to or
representatives of the sovereign.) Such a breach by a
candidate (and possibly by those hoping to be his client)
could take place in any institution, as all will participate in the
initiation process, and so all institutions must internalize the
distinction between obedience to the sovereign and
presentation of “work processes” to the candidates—in this
way, no breach will go undetected.

Making this distinction between commands from and
obligations to the sovereign, on the one hand, and
participating in the process of initiation of potential
sovereigns, on the other hand, is, then, the most

fundamental tribute to the center paid in a “rightless”
system. This distinction will run through all institutions,
practices and discourses, in various ways, explicit and
implicit. But it then follows that all assessment and even
policing of social activities will involve detecting and
deferring breaches of the boundary between the present
sovereign and the future of sovereignty. The distinction in
question presupposes that the only thing that stands outside
of sovereign power is the paradox of power itself, which is in
fact instantiated in the temporalizing of sovereignty.
Degeneration in governance and disloyalty will be effects of
and contribute to the treating of potential sovereigns as
present or imminent sovereigns. The social order will
develop “specialists” in making the distinction, which is to
say specialists in the paradox of power.

The Axial Age acquisitions have always involved the creation
of congregations of those who meet to explore together the
consequences of the post-sacrificial revelation regarding the
paradox of power they have received. Whatever the
differences between Confucian thought, Platonism,
Buddhism, Judaism, Islam, Christianity, and other products
of the Axial Age, they all rely upon the at least occasional,
but usually institutionalized, commitment of “adepts” to
clarifying and renewing the revelation in the face of its
obfuscations by poorly managed resentments toward the
center. It is in the creation of such small groups, or

disciplines, that we can identify the retrieval of the originary
scene against the background of the crisis of resentment.
Such groups call for some kind of ascension or heightening
of deferral, in this case deferral of the very resentments that
have brought the social order into crisis and made existing
forms of sacrality ineffective. The disciplines guard the
boundary between themselves and the norm of ordinary
attentional spaces, while at the same time moving
throughout the social order in various ways, inviting recruits,
trying to modify especially egregious social practices,
seeking the ear of the powerful, leaving records of the
discipline’s thinking and practices. This remains the case
even when a particular discipline, like the Christian
commemoration of the crucifixion, itself becomes the social
norm—that just means new disciplines need to be created to
preserve the original revelation against its dilution.

In identifying the paradoxical nature of power in a way that
the sovereign can never completely grasp in the act of
exercising power, the disciplines potentially set themselves
against the sovereign. After all, they have pledged
themselves to a center older and higher than the sovereign
center, and must judge the sovereign center to be lacking in
comparison. We can already see the implications of this
construct in the relations between the prophets and kings in
the Hebrew Bible, but the potential becomes full-blown
reality in the European Christian Middle Ages. From a strictly

theoretical point of view, all of modern political thinking,
most especially the “rights talk” I began this essay by
discussing, emerges out of this ultimately unsolvable
problem: the sovereign is God’s regent on earth, which
makes him subordinate to God’s will; but God’s will can only
be interpreted by God’s representatives on earth, creating
from the very beginning the elements of dual sovereignty, or
imperium in imperio. This division is what provides the
opening to modern liberal and democratic politics, which
simply replace “God’s will” with the “people,” or the
“individual,” or the “nation,” or the “oppressed,” or the
“workers,” or some other entity in positing a “real” sovereign
to which the actual sovereign must defer. All of modern
politics involves trying to subordinate the actual sovereign to
one or another version of supposed “real” sovereignty. The
implicit, real, sovereign is who has given one one’s “rights.”
Behind the scenes are rival powers using these purported
legitimations to pin the actual sovereign to their own
mapping of actual onto real sovereignty. The state is
centralized, power is accumulated, the state becomes a
bigger prize, power is more insecure, and the government
does less and less governing.

The Axial Age revelations regarding the paradox of power
can be integrated into a secure social order by situating the
disciplines within institutions, and charging them with
maintaining the distinction between present and future

sovereignty. In this way they provide feedback to the
sovereign without claiming to answer to some higher
authority. Any command can be obeyed in different ways,
and the more open-ended the command the more the
servant is confronted with the distinction between its “letter”
and “spirit.” The disciplines display their loyalty to the
sovereign by presenting their obedience to the particularly
open-ended charges they are given as in the “highest” spirit
of the sovereign—in this way, they never place themselves
outside of sovereign power while “reading” the sovereign’s
commands back to him (declaratively) in a way that enables
him to sharpen his own understanding of the intent informing
them. This is the most basic form taken by the paradox of
power: that the one commanding is himself constituted by
the ways his command will be taken up. As Gans shows in
his analysis of the imperative in The Origin of Language, for
the one commanding the command is essentially an
ostensive, a sign whose very issuance generates the reality it
indicates; for the one receiving the command, meanwhile,
the imperative represents a desire, which by its nature can
never be fulfilled in the exact form in which it was conceived.
The disciplines stand in this gap between the ostensive and
desiring dimensions of the imperative. The disciplines also
represent, then, the solution to the other problem endemic
to autocratic rule: how to remove the manifestly the unfit
ruler. The disciplines go as far as they can in making the ruler
fitter, while in the last extremity they might work counter to

the usual process and transfer their loyalty to one of the
potential sovereigns. Of course there are dangers implicit
here, but that is the case with any social order comprised of
desiring and resentful beings, and we would have to rely
upon the people produced within such an order having the
intelligence, responsibility—in sum, the sovereign imaginary
—to go through the established layers of trust (first of all the
sovereign, but then those whom the sovereign himself has
trusted…) in such a way as to maintain the singularity of the
center. The founding assumption that the occupant of the
center must not be subject to any “higher” or “more real”
form of sovereignty is preserved.

I hope it is clear that the post-liberal, post-democratic form
of social order I am proposing here does not involve a return
to some earlier, more primitive social form. In fact, the most
prominent form taken by the disciplines today is, of course,
that of the scientific discipline, organized around the
laboratory and the experiment. The study of the paradox of
power would be the social science, taking many forms and
treating all social institutions as its “laboratories.” Needless
to say, the kind of experimentation possible with the
disciplines of physics, chemistry and (with some limitations)
biology are inapplicable to social relations. The “praxical”
study of social order takes the form, rather, of making the
norms, rules, hierarchies, and, again, the sovereign
imaginary followed tacitly by everyone, more explicit. And

then a little more explicit. When anomalies emerge, new
practices need to be acknowledged. The center is served
and “verified” by naming practices, entities and agencies
that have so far gone unnoticed and unacknowledged.
Those in the disciplines invent names and take on names
that bring more of the tacit to light, and allows it to be
authorized and recuperated within the system.

A word on economics and technology. By now, the only
remaining justification for the liberal order seems to be that it
has made us rich (claims that it makes us freer are, it seems
to me, made much more tentatively and taken much less
seriously these days—when Twitter, Facebook and Google
are rejiggering their algorithms to marginalize “problematic”
sites and users, the mask of power is thinning rapidly)—so
far, at least, we are still wealthier than the Chinese. It may
th
very well be that the liberal governance of the 19 and early
th
20 century provided a space for the extraordinarily rapid
and comprehensive industrialization of Western societies.
The loosening of sovereign order allowed a few very
talented, very intelligent, and sometimes very sociopathic
individuals to exploit the simultaneous rapid centralization of
those societies to put scientific and engineering disciplines
to work in unprecedented ways. There is no need to
surrender any of these acquisitions, even if we think that the
social order which provided a hothouse for their
development by now (at least) causes far more harm than

the benefits offered by technological advances it still
enables (in increasingly limited ways). There is also every
reason to support some kind of market, but one constrained
(as every market has always been constrained) by the needs
of sovereign power. At the very least, for example, the
sovereign wants all the means needed for maintaining armed
and police forces (weapons, the science and technology
needed to produce weapons, the raw materials—metals,
sources of energy—information technology and so on) to
remain at hand. And the corporate form, with deep roots in
Western culture, which involves the chartering of enterprises
(mostly but by no means only economic) by the sovereign,
provides a structure for managing relations between
economic units and the state.

Clearly, international order would need to be rethought
radically on post-liberal terms. Ultimately, we can assume
hegemonic relations between larger, more powerful and
more dependent states—there is nothing particularly new in
that, even if liberalism prefers to conceal such relations
behind the supposed sovereign equality of all states. The
hegemonic states would grant sovereignty to their clients up
until the point where ineffective or treacherous governance
on the part of the client state subverts the larger order of
sovereignties itself. Rivalries between hegemonic states,
over acquiring clients among other things, may be inevitable,
but the respect for sovereign order provides a better basis

for peace than human rights or some such chimera. It will be
argued that state sovereignty has already been tried as a
basis for international order in the post-Westphalian world,
but it must be said that the coincidence of this order with the
emergence of the extreme disorder introduced by liberalism
makes this an invalid test of the concept. We will still be left
with might be the greatest problem facing humanity since
World War 2, even if we discuss it far less now than during
the Cold War: the existence of nuclear weapons, whose use
could in minutes destroy all of civilization. The best answer
to this threat is the development of prophylaxes which can
neutralize the danger. Missile defense shields are the first
step in this direction, but as yet unimaginable advances will
certainly take place. One thing all (but at least the most
powerful) sovereigns may be able to agree on is that it would
be better if more scientific resources and sophistication
were to go into rendering social orders immune from not only
nuclear weapons but from the weaponization of all forms of
scientific and technological development. As Peter Sloterdijk
has argued, the self-immunization of social orders from
threats of all kinds, including internal ideological and
psychopathological threats, is essentially synonymous with
civilization. Those sovereigns behind in the process of self-
immunization might object to having their offensive weapons
neutralized before they can catch up, but a tipping point can
be reached, with the aid of the firmness, moderation and
generosity of the more advanced state, beyond which self-

immunization will make “offensiveness” of diminishing value.
What is at any rate certain is that only centered
sovereignties could bring their actions into correspondence
with discussions of this kind.

Not too much thought should be given to the specifics of
post-liberal social order—doing so just creates disputes that
cannot be settled. Liberal theory is a very aggressive,
uncompromising and universalizing theory, and is very
difficult to confront head on without getting involved in its
own paradoxes. To argue with liberalism is to acknowledge it
as a legitimate debating partner and, since liberalism is in
power, it is to accept its legitimation of you as a legitimate
disputant. No matter how the discussion or debate turns out,
liberalism wins. What can be done, though, is to display the
wreckage liberalism leaves in its wake: as an idea, what is
most basic to liberalism is the autonomy of the individual
relative to social obligations and traditions; liberalism,
therefore, must function as a battering ram against all
obligations and traditions (and, by now, even biological
reality). This destructive activity is constant and extensive,
because all of our social reality is constituted through
obligations and traditions. In the present moment, in
particular, the wreckage is piling up in ways that can no
longer be avoided or denied without very obtrusive media
and state intervention and manipulation: families broken by
feminism, nations broken by immigration and free trade,

individuals broken by consumerism and de-industrialization,
institutions and communities broken by victimary
viciousness.

But more important than all this material and social
wreckage, in fact, inclusive of it, is the breaking of meaning
effected by liberalism. I mean “meaning” in the most literal
sense here: liberalism makes it less and less possible for
people to say what they mean, or to mean anything at all, at
least if they want to communicate and circulate within the
existing order. By “meaning,” what I mean is that there is a
shared ostensive that “seals” any discourse. The shared
ostensive doesn’t have to be a thing in the world, a referent—
it can just as readily be a concept, or a distinction between
things. If I note something about “the roof on that house over
there,” it’s easy enough to see where the meaning lies: you
can direct your attention to where I am drawing it and see
whatever I saw as noteworthy about the roof of that house
we can both see. Meaning is established rather differently in
a scientific discipline organized around experimental
protocols. But what provides for meaning in social order is
the conjunction of power and accountability. If I say “Smith is
considering putting a traffic light on that corner,” the
sentence makes sense (has meaning) if we know who Smith
is and if Smith is someone whose thinking about putting a
traffic light on that corner has some determinate relation to a
traffic light actually ending up there—say, the mayor, or a

traffic specialist hired by the city. If the only Smith we both
know is a pianist who lives across the country, you can’t
really know what I’m talking about. The more we all know
who is responsible for making things happen, and the more
those people actually do make those things happen, the
more meaningfully we can speak. The presumption of a
shared order is just as necessary for more abstract and
theoretical discussions, which depend upon a shared
intellectual tradition, shared texts, a range of known
interpretations of those texts, institutions that perpetuate
the study of those texts, and so on. Even more “rogue,
“avant-garde” or “unorthodox” intellectual spaces
distinguish themselves from the more established ones,
upon which they therefore depend for making meaning.

Now, let’s remind ourselves of my opening discussion of
“rights.” “Rights” can make sense to the extent that they are
themselves embedded in social obligations and traditions—
for example, the “rights” peasants may have “acquired” over
the centuries to use some part of the master’s land for
grazing their animals. But we haven’t spoken about “rights”
like that in a very long time, a fact that itself testifies to the
wreckage liberalism has wrought on the language: now,
“rights” above all refer to claims on others with no basis in
tradition or established social obligations; indeed, that is
their justification, that those traditions and obligations have
constituted unjust exercises of power, marginalization and

exclusion upon those expected to respect them. “Right” is
coming to refer to some demand no one would have thought
of before hearing it, and yet which (or for that very reason)
indicts the entire social order of crimes beyond reparation.
The point of rights talk now is to generate new forms of
power, to be enforced by new centralizations of the state
power, informed by new splinterings of power centers
grasping at access to state power. The corrosive effects
work through all political language but eventually all
language, to the point where if you make sense in a liberal
order, you make sense in spite of and against that order: by
creating a space where discourse can be shared and
contained. (Complaints against specialist jargon are legion,
but I’ve never seen anyone consider whether every day,
commonsense discourse in liberal orders might, in fact, be
far more littered with empty, bizarre and unintelligible terms
than the most abstruse jargon. I’m not referring to slang—I
have in mind the ordinary ways people come to speak of
desires, hopes, obligations and so on. “Meaning,” in the more
“existential” sense is clearly implicated here as well.)
Responsible language, under late, spiraling, liberalism, must
face and record honestly and without blanching the
wreckage; and, on the other side, create spaces where
meaning is possible because accountability can be joined to
power.

So, what is to be done? Infiltrate the most proximate

discipline. Study its origin in the paradox of power. Make the
paradox of power explicit where it is now tacit. Become a
living, breathing sign of the paradox of power. Listen very
carefully for commands from the center. Wait until the center
is made singular again, and initiates a new distribution. Be
ready to commemorate the transfer of power.

Works Cited

Gans, Eric. The End of Culture: Toward a Generative
Anthropology. University of California Press, 1985.

⸻-. Originary Thinking: Elements of Generative
Anthropology. Stanford University Press, 1993.

⸻-. “On Firstness” (45-57) The Originary Hypothesis: A
Minimal Proposal for Humanistic Inquiry (ed. Adam Katz),
Davies Publishing Group, 2007.

⸻-. The Origin of Language, New Edition. Forthcoming,
Davies.

⸻-. “Liberal Democracy in Question,” Chronicle of Love
& Resentment 562, online.

⸻-. “The Centre,” Chronicle of Love & Resentment 579,
online.

Glendon, Mary Ann. Rights Talk: The Impoverishment of

Political Discourse. Free Press, 1993.

Graeber, David. Debt—Updated and Expanded—the First
5,000 Years. Melville House, 2014.

Rieff, Philip. Charisma: The Gift of Grace and How it Has
Been Taken From Us. Pantheon, 2007.

Sloterdijk, Peter. You Must Change Your Life. Polity, 2014.