

Ta l k   o f   t h e   C e n t e r
...the social sciences were born on the day when the
'origin of society' was consigned to a desk draw—to the
file labelled 'fantasies.'
        — Regis Debray
Where to begin? This is a basic question for any philosophy
or discourse in the human sciences: what do you take to be
the fundamental "unit" of analysis, or methodological
principle, or subject position of the master of the discourse—
and why? You can start with something that seems very
fundamental, like "Being," or a perplexing question that
might come up in discourse (what is the "good"?); in
psychology you start with something like the "mind" or
"psyche," in sociology "society," or the "group," but these
concepts just reiterate those posited by the disciplines
themselves. Why are there "groups" Why is there "society"?
"Mind"? "Consciousness"? Is "Being" anything more than a
grammatical artifact? Etc. If these are not simply
transhistorical or eternal concepts, both the concepts and
their referents must have come into existence at some point,
so, to answer a question like "why 'society'" or "why 'mind'"
assumes at one point there was no such thing as "society"
or "mind" and at another point there was—or that at one
point concepts like "society" and "mind" would not have
been intelligible and then at another point they became so—

the referent and the term came into being together.
It's possible to say that there are no starting points or
origins: we are always in the middle, always becoming. To
say something like this to have already chosen a starting
point: the question of Being vs. Becoming. It's a
philosophical starting point, which therefore locates us
within the discipline of philosophy—a discipline which has
always had imperial ambitions, asserting a right to examine
the passports of anyone claiming to enter into the
discourses of what we could broadly call the "academy."
What, then, is the origin of philosophy? Is there a time when
humans were not questioning the relationship between
Being and Becoming (or the One and the Many, etc.), and
then a time when they were—and, therefore, an event,
something happening, that involved crossing over that
threshold? If so, we can't expect philosophy to be
completely aware or forthcoming about what that event
entailed. After all, we know for certain that ritual came before
philosophy; so, for that matter, did tragedy (with ritual
preceding tragedy, which is really a modification of ritual).
So, philosophy's "coming out" must have had something to
do with opposing, modifying, or rejecting (philosophy itself
might say "transcending") ritual. Can philosophy be trusted
to tell us what was involved in crossing that threshold?
Any starting point that cannot account for its emergence out

of ritual must therefore be of limited value, and this is the
case for philosophy and all its children, which includes all of
the human sciences. "Groups," "society," "mind,"
"consciousness," "Being and Becoming" and all the rest are
concepts raised over the graves of ritual. This would mean
that a real origin would have to precede ritual. But, of course,
even a word like "ritual" is a product of the human sciences
and is therefore a way of looking at rituals through the rear-
view mirror, so to speak. Still, what we now call "rituals" can
share a common point of reference with peoples who
engage in rituals, and with peoples who have left us records
of the rituals they once engaged in in a way concepts that
emerged in philosophy's wake can't. We could ask, for
example, what happens when a particular act is performed
and those performing the act could give us an answer. We
could elicit a language, overlapping across ritual scenes, of
interactions between beings performing rituals and beings
summoned, or appeased, or vivified, by those rituals. And we
can ask about the origins of rituals because any group of
people performing rituals will have their own accounts of the
origins of those rituals because the origins are part of their
efficacy. Are inquiring into, narrating, and performing the
origins of the things we do no longer part of the efficacy of
those doings? If not, when did they cease to be so?
The remnants of rituals we retain today give us information
about what distinguishes a ritually based order from

whatever we are to call what we have now. We can work with
the kinds of simple examples J.L Austin used in explaining
his concept of linguistic "performativity," like marrying a
couple or christening a ship. We could argue about this, but
I'm going to say that what appears to be the attenuated
nature of these rituals is precisely what provides us with
information regarding their origins, and our human origins
along with them. We know that a clergyman can't actually
provide a married couple with good fortune or prosperity or
curse them with the opposite if they fail to fulfill their vows—
the ceremony doesn't "do" anything in that sense. What it
does is change their condition and initiate them into the
community in a new way. This change of condition has all
kinds of consequences that are reinforced by other
measures taken by the community—a married couple is
treated differently in the law, their children have a different
status, and so on, than is the case with unmarried couples.
This is precisely the kind of "privilege" so resented by those
who object to even these minimal elements of ritual culture
remaining, and who are the intellectual descendants of those
who first of all defined their practices against ritual—
philosophers. On what would philosophers form a
community, if not on ritual? Surely the search for truth, of
which ritual will sooner or later come into philosophy's sights
as the primary enemy because while, for the practitioner of a
rite, the rite lives within the sphere of radiation of its origin,
for the philosopher the ritual has no real origin—it is an

invented origin, by someone interested in suppressing the
search for the truth. And the philosopher has a point here,
even if we can note that a violent act of instituting a mythical
account of the origin of a ritual so as to suppress its real
origin would itself be a kind of origin, pointing more reliably
to the more obscure one than does the philosophical
critique.
The philosopher has no interest in seeking out the true origin
of ritual (even though that should be exactly what he's
interested in) because that origin lies in something that
precedes and makes possible the search for truth: the
foundation of the community itself in a shared act or event. If
marriage changes the condition of the couple by conferring
upon them a new (for them) status honored in a particular
way by the community, then it might very well be that the
origin of ritual lies in changing the "status" of the entire
community, which can only mean creating that community
as this community. This claim gets us into paradoxes which
not too many philosophers have taken seriously—Rousseau,
to his credit, was an exception, as he found himself puzzled
by the relation between the community as constituting and
the community as constituted. To found the community you
must have already been a community so as to carry out the
founding. It's no coincidence that we find a similar paradox
when it comes to the origin of language which, unless you
want to embark upon the arduous and disingenuous practice

of denying all differences between human language and the
communications of even the most intelligent animals, must
also have not existed at one point, and therefore come into
existence at another. And we have the same problem here as
with ritual: how could members of a community know what
the newly created words or signs mean without already
having a linguistic system and community which would
confer meaning upon those words or signs?
I think we've wandered off of philosophy's reservation here.
Do we even have any right to continue? I, and you, if you're
still with me, have found myself in the same kind of
paradoxical situation as those originating language and
ritual: I have to confer a kind of legitimacy on my discourse
without having the kind of legitimacy that comes from
subordinating myself to an acknowledged "master" within
philosophy or the human sciences that would enable me to
do so. Not to be too dramatic, but this is the kind of
"pharmakonian" situation that Derrida drew our attention to
without, at least in my view, being willing enough to set aside
his own institutional and disciplinary legitimacy to occupy.
Whether other practitioners of what has come to be known
as "generative anthropology" (you knew that's what I've
been talking about), including its founder, have efficaciously
occupied such a position; whether it's necessary to do so,
and if so, how, in order to inscribe in history the hypothesis
we must leap into in order to resolve while preserving these

paradoxes, are all very interesting questions. Think of the
kind of overwhelming authority those historically located at
the "vortex" of such paradoxes have had to invoke in order
to imperatively impose their ritual enactment of the paradox.
Obviously, I don't have anything approaching such
revelational or scriptural authority, or even anything
resembling it. One can just elicit signs of the origin of the
sign one is issuing in all the other signs and acts it is
deferring and differing and in the conditions of deferral (or
differance) across the infrastructures enabling its
articulation.
Why it is difficult to do so will lead us to the, not resolution,
but presentation of this "stack" of paradoxes. I think that
Rene Girard was never more correct or insightful when we
asserted that dwelling too much upon our fundamentally
mimetic nature is simply unbearable. Literature professors,
he said, in his book on Shakespeare, would rather admit they
want to have sex with their mothers and kill their fathers than
admit that they feel envy. Who could bear to see an
unflinching inventory of the successive bouts of imitation,
emulation, envy, resentment, installation of gestures and
attitudes, dwelling upon and forgetting of slights and, even
more, those brief glimpses of the shameful (why so
shameful?) pretense that the acquiescence to the desire of
others was nothing more than our own self-creation?
Imagine what speaking to each other would be like if we just

took for granted that every word and movement of the other
was borrowed and translated from another on the condition
that that borrowing and translation be denied to the point of
forgetting. Much better to argue about whether to be a
materialist or idealist. Like with ritual, we retain some sense
of our mimetic nature—we speak of good and bad models
and examples, and most arguments about "culture" take that
mimetic nature for granted. And yet there's not much
appetite for looking into how the sausage is made, with
"positive" and "negative" role models rather anodyne
euphemisms for what's involved in the chaotic construction
of a "self," especially under conditions bereft of any carefully
plotted out initiatory path for doing so—which suggests that
the suppression of mimesis has something to do with the
burial of ritual under philosophy. The belief that your mother-
in-law is torturing you through the "evil eye" in its way
demonstrates greater knowledge of social interaction than
most of our psychology. Even, or especially, if your mother-
in-law happens to be dead.
In a social order that takes the individual as the foundational
social "unit" any admission that you are not wholly yourself
just paints a target on your back—you're laying out your
vulnerabilities before those who might very well be enemies
and, in fact, might be more likely to become your enemies
precisely because they see those vulnerabilities. Consider
how much of the discourse and practices you and others are

engaged in can plausibly be seen as ensuring the
boundaries around an intact, self-originating self remain
intact. That thing I did—it was the real me who did it. All our
institutions, most basically our legal ones, would fall without
everyone being willing to say that. I do wonder whether so
much of what seems to me ineffectual in the presentation
and promotion of "generative anthropology" can be
attributed to the sense that there is something impossible
about being a bearer and constant reminder of the mimetic
nature of the human and what is involved in not simply falling
sway to it. The terms of acquiring a "warrant" to boldly
proclaim "generative anthropology" the rightful successor
of, say, cybernetics, are far more difficult than those required
to proclaim, say, the latest new form of co-existence
between man and machine.
Ritual must, then, be "about" all this mimetic fervor, but ritual
can't speak about it as such (it can only reconcile it on the
spot), and the fact that we can speak about ritual in these
terms also means we can't return to it in any strong sense.
We have to get "behind" ritual so as to get beyond it in the
"right" (non-philosophical, non-mimetic denying) way. I just
present your own brief inspection of human interactions
you're familiar with as evidence that our mimetic nature is
regarded as shameful (who comes out and says, "that's not
my idea, I'm just repeating what that guy said," other than to
quickly, cleanly and shamefacedly disavow what has been

said. But we can all see that others do "repeat what the
other guy said" all the time.) Any serious inquirer into things
human will keep pressing on this point, then. And I remind
you that we are without warrant here, we're liable to be
rounded up and ticketed for unlicensed inquiry at any time.
Now, the very thing that makes mimesis unavoidably evident
and therefore shameful is what also what would seem to
neutralize it: everyone just repeating what everyone else
says. Conflict would be impossible in that case. Except that
what counts as "repeating" is not so simple. Now, this is the
kind of question philosophy loves to get its hands on
—"identity and difference"! But if we're talking about a
situation in which the condition and maybe the existence of
the community depends upon some kind of "agreement"
here, how the impending disaster is to be avoided must at
least some extent be improvised and assessed on the spot.
(In thinking through mimesis, then, we are always thinking
about ways of landing in and preventing humanly made
catastrophes.)
This thought experiment (it could be tried out in actuality—
surely some enterprising therapist could give it a go) of
avoiding conflict by having each person repeat what the
other said, however fruitful, does not get us out of the
paradoxes I'm insisting we refuse to lose sight of. You could
always notice some difference between what each person
and then the next says, some difference in tone, posture,

gesture, or context (since part of the context is what the
other couldn't have included because it's what he said). So,
you can always try to repeat more precisely and
unmistakably, but at the same time this means everyone
involved would become more expert in noticing ever smaller
differences and making ever larger issues of them. But we
might at least arrive at a kind of steady or meta-stable state
of the paradoxes here. The more this ritual of repetition goes
on, and even the more "narcissisms of small differences" it
generates, the more each participant can only represent to
himself what he is doing by locating other reference points
within the other ways those in the community have said the
same thing as everyone is saying. The fact that we're all
trying to repeat the same thing, and woe to us if we don't, is
installed at and as the basis of the community. No one could
ever say anything that couldn't be treated as a more or less
competent, ingenious, desperate, defiant attempt to repeat
what everyone else is saying—perhaps with an ever greater
awareness of how, after all, impossible it really is.
In this way we find the "transcendence" of mimesis within
mimesis itself. Criteria for more and less highly valued
cultural products suggest themselves. The cultural products
we would want to repeat the most carefully and elaborately
(eddies of repetition within the broader arena of repeating)
would be those that find likenesses among practices that
seem to be different (failed attempts to repeat, and therefore

dangerous), without minimizing the perception of failure that
attended to the reception of those practices—the scope of
what can count as repeating what everyone else is saying is
expanded, while also creating the expectation that the newly
perceived scope be brought into future efforts to repeat
what everyone else is saying. Landmarks, ceremonies,
holidays, and monuments are all created to commemorate
events where likely failure was retrieved as a new way of
repeating what everyone else is saying. Those
commemorations in turn provide more ways of repeating
what everyone else is saying, because they are themselves
what everyone else is saying. (I hope you will all notice the
way I have repeated without exactly repeating what I always
say, and in that way maybe repeating it all the more
faithfully.)
I can now propose that what I have described in this thought
experiment is exactly what happens all the time, in every
human community. There is not a human interaction that
can't productively and exhaustively be studied as an attempt
on the part of all involved to repeat as exactly as possible
what everyone is really saying. You're trying to repeat what
your enemy is not quite succeeding to say by identifying his
inimical sayings and doings, you're repeating what those
who don't "get it" really would be saying if they had arrived
at a higher level of circulation of repeating what everyone is
saying, you're trying to create a history for yourself as a

continuous attempt to meet ever more exacting standards of
saying what everyone else is saying. I would challenge you to
identify some human interaction that couldn't productively
and exhaustively be described in this way, so as to integrate
any human word or deed into the full expanse of history and
the spread of institutions. I challenge you to find a more
productive and exhaustive way of doing so, even if you want
to bring into play the full philosophical and sociological
apparatus of "society," "mind," "becoming" and so on.
What this means is that "generative anthropology" is
ultimately a kind of "languaging," entering any discourse and
making it more of what it already is, saying the same thing
everyone else is saying and, therefore, finding ways to say
that you are saying the same thing everyone else is saying,
This involves remembering when the crisis of imitation was
resolved by first one and then two and eventually everyone
reversing the cataclysmic trajectory by repeating what the
others say by, first of all, treating it as something said rather
than an appropriation of something. You can remember this
collective extrication from the crisis because language is
nothing more than a field of monuments to such extrications,
with reciprocal references that can be made to saturate the
space by selecting the way of saying what everyone else is
saying that draws into its orbit as many other ways of saying
what everyone else is saying as possible. If all utterances
carried along with them reminders of their origin in the first

humans' materialized imagining of the dead end created by
their own mimetic desires then "generative anthropology"
would no longer be necessary. And this means that the
proper practice of "generative anthropology" is to locate
oneself as close as possible to that vanishing point where
language use itself would be nothing more than "tagging" all
utterances with such reminders and thereby maximally
leveraging the inexhaustibility of saying the same thing
everyone else is saying.
The paradoxes of founding are not thereby eliminated and
we will always remain mimetic creatures—indeed, our shared
project of saying the same thing everyone else is saying
cements our mimetic nature and closes off all exits (not that
there were any, or that we still can't fantasize about any).
And as long as we are mimetic beings the space of mimesis
can be saturated, which means it is always possible to
imagine that the other has always already tracked all of your
future moves and gotten there before you so you can never
again say or do anything that is "yours." This possibility of
being utterly silenced, and therefore being taken with the
paradoxical necessity of joining the race to silence the other
first, will always remain the background, threatening to
become the foreground of everybody saying what everyone
else is saying. To say what everyone else is saying therefore
entails including by gesturing toward this possibility, which
always takes on a different form. Everybody wanting the

same thing must endlessly be converted into everyone
saying the same thing, without a firm line ever being drawn
once and for all. Doing so must involve saying the wanting,
which is to say making explicit what might be and usually is
left implicit—we can't say everything we want all the time,
just those things and times we want that make the pursuit of
wants unredeemed by sayings more likely. All the wants
converging together create necessity, and necessarily
converge on those who make the interplay of wanting and
saying explicit and insistent. Repeating that we're all
repeating and must continue repeating what everyone else is
saying enacts that interplay of "absolute" mimesis and its
ongoing dispersal. And you could repeat what everyone else
is saying in the only way that you can right here and now by
making it a bit more the same this time.