

Why Generative
Anthropology? – Guest
columnist: Peter Goldman
Eric Gans
This is the text of Peter’s “Introduction to GA,” delivered on
June 27, 2013, at the opening of the 7th Annual Generative
Anthropology Summer Conference at UCLA:
There have been many attempts to set the humanities on a
scientific basis: phenomenology, structuralism, sociobiology,
various functionalist accounts. Yet, in my estimation, there
has been only one successful attempt, and that is
Generative Anthropology (GA), the first real science of the
human. But we have to immediately qualify this statement
because GA is not a science in the same sense as the
physical sciences; the verification process for our claims is
not the same. And GA does not really belong among the
social sciences either, even though what we do is certainly
compatible with their practice. Nor is GA a “theory” in the
same category as contemporary textual theories like post-
colonialism or deconstruction. And finally, GA is quite
different from any kind of traditional humanism. Rather, GA is
a truly new way of thinking.

If we want to categorize GA, we can say that it is a theory of
the origin of language or representation, although it is much
more than that. So the first question we need to answer is,
why do we need a theory of language at all, if, for example,
we’re trying to understand a work of literature? After all,
scholars of the humanities have been going along just fine
for hundreds of years without any theory of language or its
origin. But any analysis of a work of literature (or cultural
artifact) necessarily implies a theory of language, the basis
of literature and culture. If we talk about works composed of
language, this implies that we know what language is. And
this is a problem, because the understanding of language
assumed in many such analyses is naïve at best, and
incoherent at worst.
A definition of language is required to place the humanities
on a truly scientific basis. Clifford Geertz writes, “The initial
problem of any science [is] defining its object of study in
such a manner as to render it susceptible of analysis”
(Interpretation of Culture 362). So in truth, a theory of
language is not optional. We need to uncover our critical
assumptions, examine them carefully, and create a definition
which can be defended against all objections. Without such
a conscious and reasoned definition, humanistic inquiry will
remain ad hoc. The only way to avoid subjectivism or
“undecidability” is through a rigorously constructed
hypothesis of our origin. With such a theoretical foundation

in place, we can make genuine progress, establishing the
answer to key questions, and building on previous work. GA
gives us a basis on which to evaluate the existing body of
humanistic scholarship and sort out the gold from the dross.
Another reason why we need a coherent theory of language
is to answer the deconstructive critique of meaning as
“undecidable.” Deconstruction has had a profound effect
upon literary criticism, but even its proponents haven’t
always appreciated that Derrida’s critique in effect renders
humanistic inquiry incoherent. If one finds Derrida’s
arguments persuasive, then all that is really left is faith or
poetry, or just repeating the deconstructive critique over and
over, applying it to new material, but always coming to the
same conclusion. Many people, of course, don’t find Derrida
persuasive, but they haven’t succeeded in refuting his
claims. It’s true that deconstruction is always vulnerable to a
pragmatic critique. But pragmatism cannot answer the
important questions raised by deconstruction. GA is the only
successful attempt to fully take into account Derrida’s work,
incorporating his insights, refuting his errors, and actually
going beyond it (see Eric Gans’s article “Differences” in
Modern Language Notes [MLN] v. 96 no. 4 [Spring 1996]
pp. 792-808).
The third reason we need a coherent theory of the origin of
language is because anthropologists and linguists have

established that language is radically different from animal
communication. If we could believe that human language is
simply a more advanced form of animal communication, then
we wouldn’t need a theory of origin; although, I would
suggest, we would still need a theory of the origin of animal
communication. Human language has syntax, we can talk
about ideas, things that are not present, and so on. But many
anthropologists haven’t really appreciated the significance of
these facts, and they still talk about animals having culture,
and they still look for a genetic basis of the origin of
language. And even anthropologists who recognize the
unique quality of human language haven’t really understood
the basis of the singularity of human language, which is not
fully explained by the formal differences, but rather by its
communal, scenic character, a point to which I’ll return. If
language is really qualitatively different from animal
communication, then it follows that the best way to
understand it is in terms of its origin.
The first claim of GA is that a hypothesis of the origin of
language is the necessary basis for the study of human
culture. Eric Gans has presented one such hypothesis, which
provides the foundation for the application of Generative
Anthropology by its followers. We welcome critiques of
Gans’s hypothesis, suggestions for change, or even a wholly
new hypothesis of our origin. Discussion of the conditions
for our origin is the starting point for GA.

The second claim is that the origin of language is an event.
This claim is a great stumbling block to many people.
Everything that distinguishes one species from another can
be explained in terms of evolution, that is, adaptation over
millions of years. Even in the punctuated-equilibrium theory
of evolution, the time frame is still thousands of years for
speciation. So why would human language be any different?
And we know that language does have a physiological basis:
the descended larynx, the large brain, the genetic
predisposition of children for learning language, and so on.
So if language did not originate in a genetic mutation, that
would be rather remarkable. A unique event in the history of
our planet; a claim that seems hubristic to many scholars.
Purely in terms of empirical observation, however, it’s clear
that humans are unique. No other species has religion or art,
not to mention culture and language. If an alien species
visited us from another star system, surely the most notable
feature of life on earth would the vast difference between
humans and all other species. And what is this difference?
Consider this: in a ritual, the human community is present to
itself as a community. There is no animal analogue for ritual
in this sense. Social animals have social orders, no doubt,
but except for humans, they are not based on ritual and
symbolic representation; they are either purely genetic, as
with bees and ants, or the social order is established on the
basis of one-on-one encounters between individuals, as with
a dominance order, found in many mammal species. It’s true

of course that animals do have quasi-ritual stereotypical
behaviors, what are called mating rituals for example. But
again, these are not communal in the human sense, and they
are instinctual, not conscious, as with language. If language
is in fact cultural and not simply instinctual, it follows
logically that the origin of language must itself be cultural.
And if language is something that we do consciously, then it
follows that the origin of language was itself conscious. But
why couldn’t conscious, cultural behavior evolve slowly, just
like every other distinction between species? Why couldn’t
animal communication evolve into human language? We
have to keep in mind the radical difference between
language and animal communication systems; if this
difference is truly radical, then it must have an origin at a
point in time. It’s like being pregnant; one is either pregnant
or not. There’s no such thing as being a little bit pregnant.
It’s the same thing with language; even if we start with a very
small degree of linguistic consciousness, it’s still a radically
new quality.
The claim that the origin of language was an event also
follows from the scenic, communal nature of language.
Genetic modifications happen first at the level of the
individual, after which they are either passed on or not,
depending on whether the individual is successful in
reproducing. But the origin of language is necessarily a
communal event because its function is social or

interpersonal. Once a human group has language, then
individuals will become adapted to the existence of
language, by evolving larger brains and so on. Without
language, the various evolutionary changes we underwent
would not be adaptive. For example, why are humans the
only species with such large brains proportional to our body
mass? For other species, larger brains then they have
already are simply not adaptive, because of the energy costs
involved in maintaining them. It’s because we have language
and culture that a large brain becomes adaptive. Human
evolution is driven essentially by the existence of language.
So the next question is, what kind of event is the origin of
language, and what motivates it. Why does language exist at
all? Professor Gans defines the human as the species for
which conflict within the group poses the main obstacle to
survival. In other words, our crucial adaptive problem is with
each other, not with the environment, as is the case with
every other species. Human history bears out the claim that
humans are a violent species. My colleague in the
Anthropology department informs me that it’s more accurate
to say that our species is marked by our ability to cooperate
and our many institutions for avoiding conflict. But this is a
false dichotomy. The reason we have so many cultural
institutions for avoiding conflict is because we need them.
Building on the pioneering work of René Girard, Eric Gans
notes that our violent tendencies are derived from our facility

for imitation or mimesis. Mimesis is an adaptive learning
behavior and as such can be considered a form of
intelligence. Our evolutionary path, even before language, is
directed towards flexibility, the ability to adapt to many
different environments, rather than purely instinct-driven
behaviors. One condition for flexibility in behavior is the
ability to learn different behaviors by imitation. But imitation,
like all genetic adaptations, has a competitive element. We
imitate in order to compete with others. And imitation can
lead directly to conflict when an individual imitates another
in the attempt to appropriate a desirable object. The
principle of parsimony dictates that if we have language, it is
because we need it. Gans’s hypothesis is that language
originates to defer our conflictual tendencies. Instead of
trading blows, we exchange words, preserving the
community at the price of deferring immediate appetitive
satisfaction. But it follows that the threat of violence must
have been such as to threaten not only one or two
individuals, but rather a group; otherwise, why would the
alpha male defer his appetitive satisfaction? It’s fairly clear
that language is adaptive for the species even if it didn’t
originate in a genetic mutation; we can communicate and
cooperate, defer violence, and as a result we have colonized
most of our planet.
Our originary hypothesis begins with a hominid species that
is becoming more mimetic; because imitation is an adaptive

learning behavior, being more mimetic could be favored by
normal evolutionary processes. We don’t know for sure the
particular hominid species that originated language. If one
favors an early origin, it could have been as far back as
Homo Habilis a full 2 million years ago; a later origin is also
possible with Homo Sapiens, about 50 or 100 thousand
years ago. There are good arguments for both cases. In any
case, becoming more mimetic also gives the species more
potential for violence, until the very existence of the group is
threatened by its own violence. These are the necessary
conditions for the emergence of language, although they are
not sufficient conditions. There can be no sufficient
conditions, because the emergence of language is a cultural
event, and cultural behavior doesn’t follow the same model
of causality as animal behavior, much less the physical
sciences. The emission of the first sign is a free act, the first
free act, and as such cannot be reduced to its prior
conditions.
Gans hypothesizes that a group of our hominid ancestors
have surrounded an appetitive object, such as a large
mammal after a successful hunt. Normally, the alpha male
would get first dibs on the best parts, and so on down the
dominance hierarchy. But mimeticism within the group has
increased to the point where everyone wants to jump in and
eat first. I should clarify that it’s not just a situation of being
extremely hungry, but rather that the central object has

become surpassingly desirable through the collective
appetitive attention given to it. At this point, a fight could
break out, which would be destructive for the group. But, at
some point, one group found another solution. The central
object appears to the group as exceptionally desirable, but
also tremendously dangerous, because of the implicit threat
of violence. The power of mimesis is such that everyone in
the group reaches out to appropriate the object, in imitation
of each other and in defiance of the dominance hierarchy;
but because the object appears to be so desirable and
dangerous, it seems that it can only be represented, not
appropriated. The gesture of appropriation is converted into
a sign representing the object, a sign which each individual
exchanges with the others. The sign designates the central
object as taboo or sacred: too desirable and dangerous to be
appropriated. This sign defers the violence threatening the
group; hence Gans’s capsule definition of culture as “the
deferral of violence through representation.”
Gans calls this event a “little bang” rather than a “big bang,”
suggesting that while this event is remembered, and
remembered as significant, it would not have totally
transformed the animal society overnight. But it was
remembered, and for a long period of time we can
hypothesize that the sign was only given at times of crisis or
potential crisis. Eventually the giving of the sign would be
repeated in ritual, accompanying the distribution of food, just

as the central appetitive object was consumed following the
deferral of violence at the originary event. It seems shocking
to think that this hominid group did not have language one
day, and the next day they did have language; but we have to
remember that their language consisted of only one sign for
quite a period of time, an ostensive gesture pointing directly
to a present object. Only over thousands or even millions of
years did this singular sign develop into the mature
declarative language we now possess. In one sense, it can
be said, then, that (mature) language developed gradually;
but we insist that its origin must have been an event, a
radical break from previous modes of communication and
social organization.
The consequences of this hypothesis are large. Eric Gans
and the students of GA have developed these results in a
large body of published work, although there is still much
work to be done. For this Chronicle, I’ll just mention one
important consequence, which is that language and cultural
representation in general are “scenic” in nature, using a term
drawn from theater. As we noticed, language originates on a
particular scene, so that its scenic nature is essential to its
existence. The term “scene” suggests first its eventful
nature, but an event with a structure: consisting of a “center,”
a locus occupied by something significant, which is
represented by signs exchanged between humans, who
occupy the “periphery” of the scene. Originally the center is

occupied by the sacred and the periphery is human; but
eventually, with the development of hierarchical society, a
human can occupy the sacred center also, either as a
putative god, or just as a “big man,” to use Marshall Sahlins’
term, one who controls the distribution of food and scarce
resources in the group. The scene, we should remember, is
fundamentally social. Interestingly, though, we each have a
private scene of representation: the memory or imagination,
or what religion calls the soul. The private scene is
necessarily derived from the public, originary scene and so it
remains social, although in a virtual sense. The existence of
the private scene is of immense importance for the
development of modernity. In primitive societies, the sacred,
and significance generally, is found on the public scene of
ritual. But we each have our own private center of sacrality—
a major theme of the New Testament. Modernity can be
described as the development of this originary potential,
what is sometimes called individualism.
It seems fair to say that the claim that language is scenic has
not made a big impact in the humanities. I think that for most
people, this sounds like just another way of saying that
language is rhetorical, which is already well-known. The
scene of representation, however, is not just a rhetorical
model of language as communication, but rather a model of
transcendence or meaning. The scene is ethical in function.
Language is not simply referential or even rhetorical but

rather scenic. The exchange of signs on the periphery of the
scene functions to defer violence and enable community;
potential violence is transcended or sublimated as
“meaning.” GA insists on ethical functionality as essential for
our understanding of any cultural phenomenon.
This short essay is necessarily only the beginning of a full
justification of GA, and I expect that readers will have a host
of questions and objections. I encourage you to read more
about Generative Anthropology. Ultimately, any theory is
justified by the results which it produces, and the insights
generated by the originary hypothesis are, I have found,
without parallel.