DOI: 10.37514/DBH-J.2024.12.1.08 Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

Book Review

AI and Writing. Sidney I. Dobrin. Broadview Press, 2023. 144 pages.

Adam Katz
Quinnipiac University

I like to think that most of the assignments I give my students are AI-proof, meaning that
students won’t try to complete them using AI, or doing so will be obvious and a failure to
address them. But there are still some assignments—for example, small ones following up
on some questions raised in class—that are a bit “leakier.” If I don’t detect their leakiness in
advance, it becomes clear as soon as I start reading student responses that look suspiciously
fake in the way we, as writing instructors, have come to recognize AI-generated work. Such
situations raise all kinds of questions about our relationship with our students, but what I
want to note here is that I’m not sure whether I give a more or less leaky assignment to see
what the AIs might be able to do with it or what the students might be able to do with the AI.
And I am, of course, aware that the AI-proof assignments I’m designing will very likely no
longer be AI-proof one or two or three new large language models down the road, in which
case defending a space for thinking independent of AI is a rearguard action. My thinking,
then, is more an inquiry into what it would mean to automate one or another of the skills or
practices I associate with literacy, productively focusing attention on how that skill or
practice is composed, and therefore how it might be iterated and transferred to other reading
and writing situations, with the endpoint of rendering the skill or practice irrelevant because
it is transferable to a machine. We must somehow, then, learn to think within this paradox
that what enables us to study human practice with increasing resolution is the very thing
leading to the disappearance of that practice—and this might simply be a compressed and
accelerated continuation of the history of human-technology relations.
Some sense of this paradox is what I find missing in Sidney Dobrin’s very useful—
maybe too useful—AI and Writing. Dobrin’s approach to AI in this short book, designed for
classroom use, is comprehensive, pragmatic, theoretically and ethically informed, business-
like and optimistic. He locates AI in the history of writing, addressing and contextualizing
questions AI has raised regarding academic integrity, intellectual property, and bias, as he
takes advantage of the uneasiness around AI to demystify these categories. He provides
suggestions regarding assignment design and ways students can be introduced to various
uses of AI. Each chapter begins with a list of “Learning Objectives,” with some things to think
about before reading the chapter, and ends with “Questions for Discussion,” often including
“provocative” ones that could serve to spark a class discussion (many of which I could
imagine students using an AI to answer). Near the end, he takes readers, presumably
teachers and students together, through a discussion of the economic transformations
expected from generative AI (GenAI), along with the implications for career opportunities for
students.
Dobrin is taking the stance—and I’m not sure what other stance would be
justifiable—that we should simply accept the existence of AI, while acknowledging the
understandable qualms about it, and get on with the business of helping our students learn
how to make the most of it: what skills will equip them to master AI and what mastering AI

1

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

will in turn enable them to do. So, for example, in a discussion of Skills that Benefit from GenAI,
Dobrin mentions “problem solving and critical thinking”:

Strong problem-solving and critical thinking skills are necessary in order to
tackle the complex challenges of any workplace. You should be able to analyze
problems, devise creative solutions, and evaluate the performance of
competing models. GenAI can be useful here too, as it’s an ideal tool for testing
hypotheses and running simulations. When prompted appropriately, many
GenAI programs are also quite effective in offering innovative solutions to
problems or sober and well-considered pro-and-con lists. (p. 99)

The boundary separating what the human is doing and what the GenAI program is doing is
rather blurry here. Other than prompting appropriately, the problem-solving and critical
thinking seem to be done by the GenAI. Presumably, the user will also assess the results
provided by the GenAI—out of however many simulations generated, one will be “better”
than the others, meaning that we have a new “skill set” here that may not be exactly what we
are accustomed to calling “problem-solving and critical thinking”: prompting and selecting
from among the results of the prompt and then iterating this practice over and over again.
Insofar as we come to think in potential “prompts,” the GenAI is no longer a simple “tool” that
we are standing outside of and “using.” A precursor to this cognitive scenario (if “cognitive”
is the right word) might be the tendency, developed as Google became the universally used
interface with the internet, to think in search terms, which must be further refined with each
new set of results. The system is using us as much as we are using it.
The implication is that the emergent human “vocation” is to train AIs, as in the
“supervised training” necessary for a computer program to, for example, consistently and
accurately identify images of cats. Supervised training is one of the more notorious aspects
of AI use, as Dobrin points out, quoting Sasha Luccioni:

Essentially, once a model has been trained on a large quantity of unlabeled data
. . . humans are then asked to interact with the model, coming up with prompts
. . ., and provide their own answers or evaluate answers provided by the model.
This data is used to continue training the model, which is then again tested by
humans, ad nauseum, until the model is deemed good enough to be released
into the world . . . . But that success has a dirty secret behind it: To keep the
costs of AI low, the people providing this “human feedback” are underpaid,
overexploited workers. (pp. 112–113)

The question, then, is whether this essential labor, carried out by underpaid and
overexploited workers can be “provocative,” as the most interesting and rewarding activity
ever; that is, if it’s really essential, then it should become completely integrated into all
economic, political and cultural institutions and at various levels of complexity, difficulty and
urgency: anyone can tell cat from non-cat, but very few people will be able to judge whether,
say, a weather model is off enough so that major climactic events might be missed, or
economic projections on which billions of dollars and hundreds of thousands of individuals’
economic futures might depend is over-weighing one patch of data—or, more precisely, what
sort of search should be undertaken, or prompt designed, to answer such questions. So, those

2

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

capable of machine training at the higher levels will be much in demand, and such careers
lucrative and, as intellectually demanding and socially important, very satisfying. We would
all “always already” be interacting with databases, and part of that interaction would be
examining and revising their composition. Whatever one might think of such a future, it’s
hard to see how our present teaching tools—our Learning Outcomes and Rubrics—are
adequate to educating the very different kinds of human who will populate it. But we will—
and should—continue to see books like Dobrin’s, and eventually they will prompt the AIs in
ways that elicit the necessary information on how we should best habituate ourselves to their
omnipresence.

3