DOI: 10.37514/DBH-J.2024.12.1.02 Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

Research Article

From Novice to Apprentice: A Pedagogy of “Academic Discourse”

Adam Katz
Quinnipiac University

Helen Bromhead (2009), in her The Reign of Truth and Faith: Epistemic Expressions in 16th
and 17th Century English, tracked the transformation of English during this period from
being a language of “certainty” to one of “doubt.” This dramatic shift, evident to anyone who
reads, for example, Shakespeare or Donne next to Dryden or Swift, has long been noted—
some might remember T. S. Eliot bemoaning a “dissociation of sensibility” following the
period of the metaphysical poets. Bromhead traced the disappearance of some words
(“forsooth,” “verily”) and the change in meaning of others (“surely,” “I suppose”) to identify
the increasing uncertainty conveyed by epistemic expressions. Bromhead herself did not
offer a broader socio-historical explanation for these changes but drew upon Anna
Wierzbicka’s (2006) earlier accounts of transformations in English that Wierzbicka often
traced back to Locke’s philosophical writings.
I open with these references for a couple of reasons. First, Bromhead’s (2009)
account of the transformation of epistemic expressions in English is strikingly similar to
recent studies of the difference between academic discourse and more “popular”
discourses carried out, in particular, by Laura Aull. As one example, and I will return to her
work later, Aull (2020) found that as writers become familiar with the stance expectations
of academic discourse, they use far fewer “boosters” (markers of stronger epistemic
commitment) and far more “hedges” (markers of weaker epistemic commitment or doubt).
The second reason is that I would like to introduce Wierzbicka’s (2010) work as providing a
vocabulary and method for speaking about language in ways that might be pedagogically
helpful. Wierzbicka (along with her associates) identified what she contended is a small
number of words with equivalents in all languages. Setting aside the empirical support for
her claims, which I cannot address here, I find her approach to be of interest because it
allows us, as writing instructors, to trace movement between simpler and more complex
expressions in ways that might make epistemic markers more visible to students. For
Weirzbicka’s Natural Semantic Primes approach, subtle epistemic expressions like
“suggest,” “assume,” “suppose,” “imply,” and so on, along with their nominalizations, can all
be traced back to more familiar primes such as “true,” “think,” “know,” “say,” and a few
others. The subtler epistemic terms can then be examined as implicating the writer in
ongoing conversations in which the views, actual and anticipated, of others must be
accounted for. This examination is consistent with Aull’s own account, which sees the
weaker epistemic commitments of academic discourse as grounded in the metalinguistic
awareness of one’s involvement in complex, overlapping conversations, in which various
reference points, layers of arguments, and yet untested claims and hypotheses need to be
acknowledged linguistically.
Composition pedagogy has always relied on other disciplines, especially as it has
struggled against reductive, standardizing pedagogies, such as those asking students to
identify “main ideas” and “themes.” David Bartholomae drew heavily upon literary

1

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

criticism, such as the work of Richard Poirier, Edward Said, Harold Bloom, Stanley Fish and
others. I see Bartholomae as exemplary because he never failed, even while acknowledging
his debt to such thinkers (and readers), to mark the ways they presuppose the very reading
capabilities (which is to say, modes of literacy) of their readers (and students) that, for
Bartholomae, are the very things we cannot presuppose. Composition has come to rely
more upon linguistics, as is the case with Aull and her sometime collaborator Zak Lancaster.
Clearly all these inputs enrich our understanding of pedagogy and always leave us with the
challenge of ensuring that concepts generated within these disciplinary spaces find their
way into assignments that ask students to do the kinds of things that we could show them
to be doing and that transfer to practices they can repeat and rework as academic readers
and writers. Wierzbicka’s (2010) work on primes seems to me to meet that standard—
unlike, I would suggest, attempts to introduce into composition theory poststructuralism,
which never proposed any way of helping instructors meet any conceivable objectives of a
first-year writing course, even one willing to challenge confining subjectivizations of
students. Asking how we might get from “I think” to “I suppose” is a way of reflecting on
language that might be made readily accessible to students.
The same could be said of David Olson’s (2016) work on the cognitive implications
of literacy in his The Mind on Paper, which addresses a metalinguistic phenomenon very
similar to that studied by Bromhead (2009) and Aull (2020). Olson provided a very simple
model for thinking about the linguistic and cognitive implications of literacy: he proposed
that we think about writing as reported speech, but reported speech stripped of everything
that, in oral communication, would contribute to the conveyance of meaning, such as
gesture and tone. So, Olson argued, in an oral setting, if I am reporting someone else’s
speech, I would imitate that speech, including its bodily incarnations—and if I want to
discredit that speech, I would do so in the same way, for example by repeating the words of
the other in a mocking way. Olson implicitly asked us to imagine how, then, one would
preserve this meaning once the body and the presence of others on a scene are removed.
Olson’s answer was that we would do so (and those creating written forms of
communication did) by loading the lost meanings in verbal expressions: so, for example, if I
want to show that I doubt the words I am reporting, and I can’t distance myself from them
through gesture and tone, I need to say that so-and-so “claimed” or “seemed to think” that
such and such was the case. Olson doesn’t seem to me to quite have said so, but it’s not hard
to imagine transferring such practices to our “reporting” of our own speech.
Olson, in turn, was relying here upon Francis-Noel Thomas and Mark Turner’s
(2011) Clear and Simple as the Truth: Writing Classic Prose. Thomas and Turner identified
what they called “classic prose,” which they traced back, interestingly, to Descartes, which is
to say the same historical “break” upon which Bromhead (2009) focused. (Can such
histories be made to come alive for students in first-year writing classes?) Classic prose is
predicated upon what we can call a “scenic” principle: write as if you were looking at the
events you are describing and you are drawing or inviting your reader into that scene.
“Clear” writing would, then, place reader and writer on the same scene, seeing the same
thing. This understanding of “clarity” is consistent with many uses of the term and,
especially, with the insistence by teachers (and often students themselves) that writing be
“clear.” Clarity essentially means unanimity: there would be no disagreement over what is
being said. Demands for clarity will strike many of us as naïve, and for good reasons—even
Thomas and Turner conceded the “fictional” nature of their ideal of prose. And yet it’s not

2

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

so easy to dismiss, for what else are we looking for when we ask a student, for example,
“What are you getting at here?” or something along those lines? But we can direct demands
for clarity to the constitution of a disciplinary space, or scene, which does, I would argue,
always have what we could call an “ostensive” dimension, in which interlocutors need to
confirm that they are indeed looking at the “same thing.” (Imagine looking through a
microscope with an untrained eye and asking the biologist alongside you, “What am I
looking at here?”)
I have begun this article by proposing some ground rules and canonical texts for the
ongoing construction of the anomalous discipline of composition (anomalous as in
constitutively supplemental to other disciplines) because I want to take up and push to
what seems to me its logical conclusion a very salutary development in composition: the
Writing about Writing (WAW) movement. Writing about writing, first, solves or at least
sharply focuses the problem over which, I think, every writing instructor has agonized:
What should students read? We are enjoined, and enjoin our students, to remember that
the “content” of the text is not what matters, as it is only a pretext for enacting certain
practices as a reader and writer, but it’s not that easy to engage texts in the complex and
recursive way we would like without caring at all about the subject matter. So, should we
give students texts they are “interested” in, maybe dealing with topics important to their
“generation” (social media!)? Aside from the condescending and, for the instructor,
potentially humiliating implications of this pandering, why in the world should we assume
that our students are all interested in the same thing? Have students vote on texts? Well,
what about the minority? And how could we imagine they would choose the kinds of texts a
composition course should be teaching, those that are at least a bit “over their heads,”
unfamiliar and resistant to their commonplaces? The same goes with having individual
students choose their own texts, with the added disadvantage that now we are not reading
texts together. Writing about Writing solves the problem by uniting the purposes of the
course with its content: The writing course is now “about” the very practices that it aims at
providing its students access to. And, insofar as students are in a writing class, perhaps we
have some right to assume they will be “interested” in writing. We can achieve precision in
the identification of reading and writing practices and provide grounds for assuming that
those practices will be nameable and therefore transferable. It is surely no coincidence that
WAW and discussions of transfer in writing studies overlap so considerably, in concerns
and participants.
But, then, why not take the next step, and make the first-year writing course not only
about writing but about the first-year writing course? This would entail having students
read and engage with texts such as those of (in my own courses) Aull, Bartholomae, Zak
Lancaster and Sarah Smith (her fascinating PhD dissertation, Error as Strategic Style)—so
far. Students are thereby introduced to the terms and the conversations producing those
terms constituting the course they are taking, and studies of student reading and the kinds
of formulas found in student and academic writing can be presented and studied in the
classroom. These texts are difficult, of course, and I continue here the tradition adopted and
advanced by Bartholomae, who insisted that students be given texts and projects to work
with that would be of interest to academics, rather than pseudo-projects like “research
papers” where students find, summarize and synthesize a few texts on a familiar topic.
(Although I don’t want to claim that Bartholomae would necessarily endorse the pedagogy
I’m proposing.) If, taking Bartholomae’s side in the Bartholomae-Elbow debate, we assume

3

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

that the purpose of the first-year writing course is to “initiate” students into, or
“acculturate” them to, the ways and habits of academic readers and writers, then in my
proposed approach we are treating students as apprentice academics. This projects a
model for students working in their disciplines, and even a somewhat “utopian” model for
the organization of pedagogy in those disciplines, while first of all treating students as
apprentices of academic discourse. The first-year writing course is, then, taking students
from being novice to being apprentice academic writers. They are apprentices in our
classes, which are teaching them to “apprentice” themselves across the disciplines. We
might consider this “experiential learning” within the university itself.
The simplest way to think of this transformation in modes of literacy from novice to
apprentice is, as Bartholomae (2004) put it, “hav[ing] one set of commonplaces replaced
with another” (p.103). Bartholomae here was drawing upon a crucial part of the rhetorical
tradition, one which is consistent with tendencies in linguistics such as construction
grammar and which enables us to speak directly about uses of language with minimal
reference to intentions or cognitive states. The commonplaces students bring to the
university are those, to refer back to a distinction made earlier, more suited to “boosters”:
those that rely upon assumptions that “everyone knows.” The commonplaces students are
to replace these with are, for starters, those that indicate epistemic modesty and gesture
towards anticipated responses within an ongoing conversation, and are therefore made up
of “hedges”: “it might be the case that ________,” “assuming ________, we could suggest,” and so
on. Situating the replacement of one set of commonplaces by another in terms of an
academic writing course, I would suggest the following formula: replacing lay concepts
with concepts in some ongoing inquiry. We would be enabling students to acquire the
metalinguistic awareness that concepts not directly put to work in present inquiry are all to
some extent “lay” and will undergo transformation within the specific research context.
This formula allows us to acknowledge student use of research aids like Wikipedia and AI,
while designing the class to let them see that such aids, even when written by experts, will
only approximate the work concepts do in the course of research.
I am now going to focus on Aull’s (2020) work in particular as a promising site of
such apprenticing insofar as her corpus studies of student writing and academic writing
suggest lines of research that students can participate in from the moment they arrive in
their composition classes. In her How Students Write: A Linguistic Analysis, Aull defined
academic discourse (more precisely, she is distinguishing between first-year and upper-
level student writing) in terms of “compression,” “coherence” and “civility.” By “civility,” Aull
meant “diplomatic evidentiality . . . blending open-mindedness with well-informed
conviction” (p. 6). Cohesion is “explicit coherence across parts of a text” (p. 7). Compression
is the “use of dense phrasal detail” (p. 7). It’s worth noting that, while Aull associated
specific linguistic features with each of these qualities, compression is the only one that has
that feature built into its definition. Aull also noted that compression “makes upper-level
writing particularly difficult to read and write, especially for those whose lexical and
grammatical habits are distant from standardized written academic English” (p. 7). I will
return to this, in my view, highly significant point later. For civility, the linguistic marker
Aull pointed out is a prevalence of hedging over boosting (p. 136), while for coherence Aull
pointed to a range of markers, including adverbs such as “also,” counters such as “however,”
words and phrases showing correlation such as “thus,” and specification and certain
determiners such as “same.” A research paper co-authored by Aull and Zak Lancaster

4

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

(2014), “Linguistic Markers of Stance in Early and Advanced Academic Writing: A Corpus-
Based Comparison,” explores these markers of civility and coherence in greater detail.
There, along with their discussion of hedging and boosting, Aull and Lancaster examined a
wide range of markers of coherence (without using the term): reformulation and
exemplification, and concessive/counter moves. They distinguished between more difficult
formulae in each of these categories: for example, specification, requiring the writer to
“reduce the scope of propositional content” (p. 16), tends to be more challenging than
exemplification. Likewise, more advanced writers use “nevertheless” far more often than do
beginning writers, who tend to rely upon “however” for their concede/counter moves,
because “nevertheless” commits the writer to following exactly the material that has been
conceded (“call[ing] for a greater orientation to refining the scope of one’s meaning by
constructing a dialogic stance by conceding and countering complexities” [pp. 21–22]).
For Aull and Lancaster (2014), all of these features of academic stance can be
correlated to the following general aspects of stance: stance toward the material, stance
toward the reader, and stance toward the “larger discourse community” (p. 24). They went
on to privilege the latter, “the positioning of one’s argument amid existing views in a larger
academic conversation,” first of all, because it is “an aspect of stance construction with
which developing students may struggle with the most” (p. 24), but more importantly, I
think, because it touches on the nature of academic discourse itself, which is that it is
constituted by an ongoing conversation irreducible to the relation between writer and
material or writer and reader. Only those participating in some form of disciplinary inquiry
can be familiar with the history of those conversations as they are embedded in a particular
text. In this context, I find it especially interesting that Aull and Lancaster’s study does not
deal with “compression” at all because if compression is what makes academic discourse
especially difficult to beginning writers, it may very well be because that is where academic
discourse is particularly marked by that history of conversations. Take an example from
Aull and Lancaster’s own essay:

It therefore seems that, while more context-attentive, ethnographic studies of
student writing are valuable (e.g., Beaufort, 2007; Cheng, 2008; Tardy, 2009),
there is still a complementary contribution to be made by descriptive, large-
scale corpus studies that compare stance patterns across stages from
incoming university writers to more advanced academic writers. (p. 3)

Here we have phrasal density, and we could imagine that this would be an especially
difficult passage for students to work with: One could work with the notion of “studies of
student writing,” but when we then add “ethnographic” and “context-attentive,” a history of
conversations within writing studies, ethnography and perhaps other humanistic fields is
alluded to in a way that outsiders would find impenetrable. On the face of it, though, it
would be far more difficult to do a corpus-based study of compression, since compression is
irreducible to the kinds of formulas characteristic of constructions of civility and coherence.
And yet it is here where the text as an archive of conversations is especially manifest in
academic discourse.
But now I am discussing reading, which Aull (and Lancaster) didn’t address at all. In
her concluding remarks in How Students Write, Aull (2020) pointed out that “the tenacity of
institutionalized discourses calls for more radical options [than adding ‘more blended,

5

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

public-facing, analytical explanatory as well as persuasive argumentative genres’]” (p. 143),
but while those options include asking students to take into account other views and
perhaps write for academic audiences, they don’t touch on the problem of reading. Aull’s
focus on discourse patterns in academic writing is consistent with Bartholomae’s insistence
that composition focus on bringing students into academic discourse, despite what seems
to be some ambivalence on her part. In her late discussion of compression, right after the
passage I quoted above, Aull seemed to question the appropriateness of asking students to
practice compression:

Since discourse patterns expressed in student writing can be tacit, especially
for novices and students who rarely receive A-grades, this patter of
compressed noun phrases merits serious consideration: if we choose to
privilege compressed, phrasal discourse, we should have good reasons why.
With respect to this and other school discourse patterns, we should examine
where intentional, relevant ways of thinking and writing end and where
unquestioned discursive socialization begins [emphasis added]. (p. 137)

The good reason for privileging compressed, phrasal discourse is that students need to be
able to read texts using it, but, even more important, the distinction Aull wanted to make
here between “intentional, relevant ways of thinking and writing” and “unquestioned
discursive socialization” needs to be deconstructed. Such practices as “dialogues” and
“conversations” necessarily involve “socialization” in the space of discourse, and
socialization is always to some extent tacit, involuntary and even “unquestioned.” Only from
within a densely constituted conversational space can one raise questions about the terms
of the conversation. Bartholomae (2004) recognized this, ambivalently but unmistakably,
when he spoke of students learning to write in “our” ways, to replace one set of
commonplaces with another (this argument, of course, is central to the “Bartholomae-
Elbow dispute”). And this recognition of the institutional character of academic writing—
that it is a matter of power and not simply ideas—is also, I think, of a piece with his
emphasis on the centrality of reading, and close reading, and of the kinds of texts academics
would take seriously, in the composition classroom. As Aull pointed out on more than one
occasion, academic discourse is “an acquired social language” (p. 144)—and how, exactly, is
language acquired, if not at least in part “unquestioningly”?
Aull’s (2015, 2020) studies of student writing make much more concrete and precise
Bartholomae’s (2004) remarks on the specificity of academic discourse; Lancaster’s (2016)
critique of Graff and Birkenstein’s They Say/I Say does even more so, by pointing out that
they are right about academic discourse being formulaic but wrong about what the
formulas are, showing how valuable the contributions this line of research is making to
writing pedagogy. But Aull’s and Lancaster’s neglect of reading, or at least their failure to
make it central to learning academic discourse, regresses behind Bartholomae’s work, and I
think we see this in Aull’s hesitation to confront students with compression. But we can
synthesize Aull’s and Lancaster’s work with Bartholomae’s in the way I proposed earlier: by
having students read academic texts, and, moreover, academic texts dealing with writing
and writing studies and, more specifically, texts dealing with composition studies itself.
Texts like those of Aull, Bartholomae and Lancaster, for example. Following the logic of
WAW and its argument that transfer is served by having students work with texts and

6

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

subject matter that provide them with a vocabulary for describing their own practices in a
writing course, having students enter discussions of composition pedagogy makes them
apprentices in composition studies and more broadly in academic discourse and the study
of it. If we are to study the patterns of academic discourse and the patterns of student
writing as they struggle to acquire academic discourse, and also wish to provide students
with a meta-linguistic awareness of the contingent terms of that discourse, should we not
invite them into those inquiries, providing them with “authentic” samples of academic
discourse along with samples of their own equally “authentic” apprentice academic
discourse to study?
Doing so would require us to take the notion of learning academic discourse as
language acquisition more seriously and maybe more literally than, to my knowledge, has
been done within composition studies so far. The only way you acquire a language is by
using it, with all the riskiness, inappropriateness and errors that entails, and that means
bringing words and phrases from the academic text into the student’s writing—not just in
the form of quotes, which are then summarized and paraphrased, but into the student’s
own sentences. If we can usefully point out academic formulas to students, we can ask them
to use those formulas, and the next step is to have them write their own sentences around
the words from the academic text. To this end, I have designed a kind of prototypical
(although, of course, fairly rare) academic sentence form, involving the use of phrases and
clauses distinctive to and from different places in the text within a sentence that articulates
those passages in some way, whether by contrast, in terms of causality, or further
specification. The student then writes a certain number of follow-up sentences, the purpose
of which is to account for the manner in which the passages have been articulated: Where is
the contrast, the causal link or specification? The student should continue to use language
from the text in these follow-up sentences, perhaps from these same passages but also from
elsewhere in the text, as she practices entering and exiting the language of the text,
gradually assimilating that language into her own. Aside from the direct engagement with
the language of the text, such sentences produce a space for addressing other issues, such
as the handling of quoted material and grammar, as not only is writing such complex
sentences a challenge for many students, but the language of the text will often need to be
“carved” in some way to work in the student’s sentences. Finally, what I am calling
“combined” and “follow-up” sentences function as a practice of rereading, as students
search for passages in the text that are repeated with a difference in the passages they use
for their combined sentences.
Here's an example of student work employing combined and follow-up sentences.
We were reading Bartholomae’s (2004) “The Argument of Reading,” which works through
some critiques of the New Criticism (each of which I would say Bartholomae to some extent
endorsed while to some extent demurring from) while retrieving from the New Criticism
(by way of engagement with some less celebrated practitioners of close reading) an
understanding of “close reading” for the composition classroom. Here the student was
working with a later passage where Bartholomae engaged with Terry Eagleton’s critique of
what he took to be the inflated pretensions of the political stakes of the New Criticism:

While Eagleton concludes that it was “really rather absurd” that “the Decline
of the West was felt to be avertible by close reading” (250), Bartholomae
views close reading as the holy grail of “the necessary preparation of a

7

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

writer” (245). Eagleton does not contend that close reading is “necessary”
and thinks that the idea it being so is “absurd.” Bartholomae’s firm stance in
favor of close reading is solidified again, and again throughout the essay
“[arguing] that the introductory course should be a course in ‘close reading,”
however, this he says is “the fundamental method of the New Criticism”
(245). This seemingly contradicts Eagleton who has previously been in favor
of the New Criticism, as he calls “the fundamental method of the New
Criticism” (245) “absurd” (250). Eagleton attacks the New Criticism in a
rather harsh manner in this section causing his previous words to be reread
in a tone of mockery, whereas Bartholomae shifts to a more conciliatory
approach. For example, new in Bartholomae’s stance is defending the New
Criticism for heling citizens “to understand propaganda and the effects of
control through mass media” (251), seemingly going against his previous
argument that the “cultural studies course...has shown almost no interest in
teaching students how to work with words” (249). Bartholomae now says
that the New Criticism helps people understand the words behind
“propaganda,” yet this discredits that students are not taught “how to work
with words.” Later, he applauds the New Criticism’s close reading as “a means
of investigation, a way to exercise discrimination in the face of commercial,
political and cultural interests” (251). In this sense, there is a “moral urgency
rooted in the sense that ‘words can do unexpected and disturbing things to
you” (249). While Bartholomae initially connects this “moral urgency” (249)
to Hum 6, there is an evident connection to New Criticism courses as well, for
they taught people to see through “propaganda” (251).

In working with the essay up until this point, the student would have developed a reading
of Bartholomae’s stance toward “close reading” as “favorable” and would therefore have
known that Eagleton’s ridicule of the claim made by critics such as F. R. Leavis that reading
literature could reverse cultural decline would likely be opposed by Bartholomae (even
though this is not guaranteed, because the relation between “close reading” and “New
Criticism” has varied throughout the essay). So, the student looked for a passage where
Bartholomae was arguing for “close reading,” of which there are many, and finds one from
an earlier discussion of Mariolina Salvatori’s course. I would guess that designating close
reading as the “holy grail” for Bartholomae is the student’s attempt to match the
“heightened” stakes implicit in a phrase like the “Decline of the West” (a Spengler reference,
which the student is extremely unlikely to be familiar with, made by Eagleton ironically,
which the student may have some sense of). The first follow-up sentence, as we practiced,
includes something from each of the passages included in the combined sentence, lining
them up symmetrically.
The student then composed another combined sentence, one that continues the
argument with Eagleton constructed in the previous one, with Bartholomae now continuing
(“solidifying”) his argument for the importance of close reading. Here, the use of “however”
to set up a contrast between the two passages is less clear: Bartholomae has been
distinguishing between the kind of close reading he’d like to see in the composition
classroom from the kind of close reading advanced by the New Criticism, without exactly
opposing it. Still, such an interpretive move on the student’s part must be assessed in terms

8

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

of the follow-up. The student now took up Bartholomae’s argument with Eagleton in the
context of what seems to be a contradiction in Eagleton’s own argument: Bartholomae had
quoted a passage from Eagleton comprised of somewhat too exuberant praise of the New
Criticism (but which would nevertheless not be easily seen as ironic by a novice academic
reader) followed by the one where Eagleton referred to the New Criticism’s ambitions more
bluntly as “absurd.” The student could now “reread” the previous passage and note the tone
of mockery (I will acknowledge that classroom discussion may have played a part here)
without, though, revising the earlier reading of the two passages as “contradictory” (we
could say this marks a particular stage in the student’s meta-awareness of the expectation
that a finished text represent a consistent position rather than provide a linear record of
the chronology of reading).
The student did realize, though, that Bartholomae (2004) had shifted toward a more
“conciliatory” approach to the New Criticism than he had displayed earlier, plausibly (or at
least thoughtfully) attributing this to Bartholomae’s response to Eagleton’s “harsh”
mockery. This realization positioned the student to see what was, in fact, new in
Bartholomae’s position at this point, which is a stance more allied to those very political
ambitions ridiculed by Eagleton. I would note here that the terms of the assignment compel
the student to keep track of Eagleton’s stance toward the New Criticism, Bartholomae’s
stance toward Eagleton, and Bartholomae’s stance, as mediated through his conversation
with Eagleton, toward the New Criticism—at this point in the essay. Now, the contrast the
student went on to set up between Bartholomae’s defense of the New Criticism and his
criticism of the “cultural studies course” is, we could say, a misreading—but it is an
interesting one, and not just a misreading. Bartholomae had critiqued cultural studies for
showing no interest in student writing, certainly not on the level of the sentence, attributing
this neglect to a valuation of its political concerns at the expense of a close concern with
student reading and writing. The student, I would guess, saw here a “contradiction”
between Bartholomae’s support of the political goals of the New Criticism and his seeming
dismissal of the political concerns of cultural studies. In that case, the student’s
“misreading” is noticing something important in the text.
The student continued with this productive misreading by contrasting more of
Bartholomae’s (2004) praise of the New Criticism with more of his critique of cultural
studies—understandably, for this novice reader and writer, it is a challenge to distinguish
between an author making similar sounding observations in different contexts and the
author “contradicting himself.” This distinction is a marker of learning (a useful pedagogical
heuristic is to require that students assume it is extremely unlikely that a professional
academic will simply “contradict himself,” taking that phrase out of commission altogether).
In the last two sentences, though, something very interesting happened. The student
connected Bartholomae’s previous, on the face of it not only apolitical but even anti-
political, discussion of the Hum 6 course at Harvard as a privileged model for thinking
about close reading in composition to Bartholomae’s now more overtly political claims on
behalf of close reading. The conclusions are not entirely clear, but the student was now
transferring the (to most of the students somewhat bewildering) attribution of “moral
urgency” from a more “literary” mode of reading to a different kind of “moral urgency,” that
to be found in enabling students to identify and resist propagandistic claims on their
attentions. An interesting next step might be to consider whether the ways in which words
can do “unexpected and disturbing things to you” has something to do with “exercising

9

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

discrimination in the face of commercial, political and cultural interests.” The student didn’t
take this step but positioned herself in relation to Bartholomae’s language in such a way
that she (or another student reading her paper) might.
Just as important as the way in which the combined and follow-up sentence
assignment takes away the student’s recourse to summary and paraphrase and enables her
to follow Bartholomae’s argument through some complex byways and even continue it a
little is the way in which the assignment has students breaking up compressed phrases and
resituating them within her own language. “Absurd” was extracted out of “really rather
absurd,” “propaganda” out of “understand propaganda and the effects of control through
mass media,” and “moral urgency” out of “moral urgency rooted in the sense . . . .” And, then,
“moral urgency” and “propaganda” got put together as the former was now directed more
specifically to the latter. This kind of dismantling and redirection of compressed passages
creates the conditions for practices I have not yet attempted but will propose here (and
attempt later): assignments asking students, first, to “reallocate” all of the words in the
compressed passages to new sentences and, second, to create new compressed passages for
themselves, such as, for example, “the moral urgency of investigating propaganda through
close reading.” There is a specific kind of grammatical problem and lesson bound up in this
kind of work, involving the possible conversions of clauses and phrases into each other. If,
for example, I were to take the sentence previous to this one and remove the phrase “there
is” (in general, it’s a question of removing the verb), we would then have “A specific kind of
grammatical problem and lesson bound up in this kind of work,” a very long noun phrase
that now needs a verb to be the head of a sentence. Such exercises not only help to
demystify the kinds of academic discourse students find most intimidating but also provide
indirect lessons in the plasticity of language, its manipulability, which are essential to
dissolving the commonplaces students come into the university with.
Another reason for designing assignments that have students bringing language
from the text directly into their sentences in prominent ways is to resist students’ recourse
to AI text generation. ChatGPT and other programs will produce adequate summaries and
paraphrases that will be hard to distinguish (and impossible to prove different) from
student writing, but so far these models can’t work with language from a text within
another’s language in an effective way. Rather than seeing AI in merely negative, preventive
terms, I would suggest taking the advent of AIs and the disruption they introduce into
pedagogy as a sign that writing classrooms have to be sites of inquiry into language (just as
the AIs themselves are products of new modes of inquiry into language) for students as
well as faculty. The Turing test should, perhaps, have always been seen in interactive terms:
as computers better approximate certain forms of human speech, it is to be expected that
humans would start to value, explore, and experiment with forms of speech easier to
distinguish from the products of computation. Even from a narrowly career perspective, it
might help students to be put in mind that future employers might be suspicious of, say,
letters of inquiry, that read too much as if they were AI-generated. As a result, writing
courses might have license and even be pressured to encourage student writing that is
more saturated in various references, idioms, tones, and so on—which is to say, that
constitute archives of conversation operating at various levels, produced within a particular
institutional and classroom space.
The argument for seeing college writing as a passage from novice to apprentice
takes on even more urgency in this context. The kinds of studies of academic discourse and

10

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

student writing conducted by Aull and Lancaster (2014) become even more interesting
here, and more interesting in their limits. I’m going to discuss a course in research writing I
taught in the spring 2024 semester, in which students were given the kind of work being
research assistants for Aull and Lancaster’s project might call for, while pointing out the
limitations of even what I was able to do. We worked with the aforementioned Aull and
Lancaster’s “Linguistic Markers of Stance in Early and Advanced Academic Writing: A
Corpus-Based Comparison,” an essay that distinguishes academic stance in terms of its
open-ended, conversational nature, which can in turn be defined in terms of specific
linguistic and rhetoric markers. Aull and Lancaster drew upon studies of academic
discourse to establish three broad categories of it: first, markers of epistemic commitment,
or the prevalence of hedges over boosters; second, code glosses, which include
reformulations and exemplifications; and, third, adversative concession/contrast markers.
For each category, Aull and Lancaster provided a list of words and phrases to guide a corpus
search and distinguish between those words and phrases more commonly used by novice
academic writers and those by more advanced ones.
As a practice of reading, I have the students reconstruct the (or a hypothetical)
argumentative or conversational space by writing the kind of combined sentences I
described earlier, but with a specific focus on the ways they specify the concept of “stance”
in terms of their continuation of Aull and Lancaster’s (2014) research project. I ask them to,
first, construct a “lay” concept of stance by using familiar sources, such as Wikipedia and AI,
and then follow the ways Aull and Lancaster differentiated their use of stance in a complex
context. Students are asked to do this with the use of contrastive formulas such as “while
‘stance’ could be defined as__________, Aull and Lancaster________.” The way in which Aull and
Lancaster worked through their literature review can be followed in a similar way, with the
difficulties of working with academic discourse addressed in terms of the histories of
conversations presupposed by the discussion. An early point in the discussion, where Aull
and Lancaster addressed the debate within composition studies of whether the
composition class should presuppose the specific and irreducible nature of disciplinary
discourse or, rather, acknowledge some basis for the “general skills” introductory writing
course prevalent in the American academy provides a good and instructive example: It is
extremely difficult for students to work out this distinction within a composition course, let
alone in the subtle way Aull and Lancaster conceded the always already discipline-specific
character of academic discourse while making space for their own study presupposing
features of academic discourse that cross the disciplines by shifting the question to the
need for inquiry into the habits and expectations of incoming students: “[d]espite the
importance and prevalence of FY writing in the U.S. model of higher education, however, we
know little about what discursive features might characterize argumentative texts
produced by incoming student writers” (p. 3). But in the context of preparing students to
join Aull and Lancaster’s research project as research assistants, “understanding” such
arguments and distinctions can be folded into distinctions students will make in their own
work on the corpus—as will, moreover, the practice of using Aull and Lancaster’s categories
to examine their own writing.
I provide the class with first-year and upper-level student papers from freely
available corpora and ask them to identify the features Aull and Lancaster (2014) have
singled out as markers of stance. This has turned out to be challenging and productive
work, with a fairly simple baseline level, which virtually all students can do (locating words

11

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

like “almost,” “apparently,” “perhaps,” and so on), but since even the more obvious hedges
or markers of reformulation and contrast depend on the context for their use, students
need to make an argument for their designation within the sentences (at least) in which
they are found. Even more, since it is easy enough to see that there are ways of fulfilling the
discursive functions of academic discourse in ways that are not included on Aull and
Lancaster’s list (presumably designed to set a threshold below which no significant findings
could be made), students can be asked to propose new additions to the list. Doing so serves
as a marker of their comprehension of Aull and Lancaster’s essay and project while also
revealing all kinds of assumptions the students have regarding the working of discourse. So,
for example, one student made the following argument (the bolded text is the excerpt from
the sample student paper the student is working with):

“Eliza Dresang wrote about a way of thinking she titled Radical Change,

a theoretical construct [that] identifies and explains books with

characteristics reflecting the types of interactivity, connectivity, and

access that permeate our emerging digital society”

“Identifies and explains” can be seen as a code gloss. Although is it not on the

list exactly, it is like ‘that means’ or this means.’ Something is being explained

in more detail creating a stronger argument. “Explains” lets us know more

implicitly that an explanation is coming. However, it can also be seen as a

booster because ‘show’ or ‘shows’ is on the list under booster. This could

mean the same thing as ‘explains’ or identifies’. These words can suggest a

greater degree of certainty.

“Identify” and “explain” are not code glosses because such words introduce the claims that
would then be glossed (“in other words,” “for example,” etc.), but the student here was
learning to think in terms of models (“it is like ‘that means’ or ‘this means’”) while
distinguishing the explanatory from other functions of discourse. Such a mistaken
application of the concept of code gloss lays the groundwork, again with the frame of
treating students as emerging apprentice academic writers, for making this further
distinction between an explanation “proper” and a “supplementary” explanation or
exemplification. Here is another sample, in which an easier identification is made alongside
a “mistaken” or at least partial one that would require a more contextual reading:

12

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

“…and they advance one page at a time with a button push rather than

by scrolling (1999). Certainly a technological leap at the time, these

portable books paved the way for other book formats to emerge.”

“Rather than” is on the list under contrast connector because the sentence

states one thing, and then uses rather to state the opposite, creating

contrast. The contrast is between advancing by one page and scrolling.

“Certainly” is working as a booster because it is literally showing its

certainty.

The student’s work with “rather than” is adequate: It works with a word from the list and
identifies the contrast being made here, even if we might want, within an expanded version
of the assignment, to examine the implications of the distinction between “advancing by
one page” and “scrolling.” But while “certainly” is, indeed, on the list of boosters and, in fact,
does function that way here (a strong epistemic commitment to the claim that portable
books were a technological leap at the time is expressed), “certainly” is more importantly
functioning as a concession (but through which pedagogical practices do we make it
possible to establish such levels of importance in the classroom space?), leading into a
contrast between what was once relevant about portable books and their lesser relevance
within a broader historical context.
That there may be a wider variety of means of hedging, glossing, conceding and
contrasting than allowed for by Aull and Lancaster’s (2014) list and, moreover, that what
functions as a booster on one level might work as a gloss or concession on another, opens
up the possibility of transforming Aull and Lancaster’s project, in the classroom and beyond
(in the classroom as beyond), into a broader way of glossing and engaging conversationally
with discourse. The slippage in the student’s work between code gloss and the claim to be
glossed reflects a recognition that all discourse is glossing some other discourse and there
is always some tacit concession and contrast in every assertion. In other words, the
distinctions between grammar, pragmatics and semantics can be deconstructed in ways
that can turn corpus searches, now aided by prompted AI, in specially curated corpora, into
routine features of writing and writing pedagogy. Take the sentence I just wrote above: The
slippage in the student’s work between code gloss and the claim to be glossed reflects a
recognition that all discourse is glossing some other discourse and there is always some tacit
concession and contrast in every assertion. A word like “slippage” includes some
“concession” to those who might find the student’s work to simply be a mistaken
application of Aull and Lancaster’s category, while “countering” with a new framing that
suggests a “correctly” apprehended connection along with the “mistake.” “Reflects a
recognition,” meanwhile, can be taken as a possible gloss on the claim that “all discourse is

13

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

glossing other discourse”: We can see that “all discourse is glossing all other discourse”
because we can see what this student has seen and done.
In my own gloss here, I am drawing upon Anna Wierzbicka’s (2010) Natural
Semantic Primes (“can,” “see,” “because,” “do”) as a possible way of glossing discourse that
might be made available to students. I would like to conclude by returning to the array of
theoretical understandings of discourse I set up in introducing my discussion: Wierzbicka,
Bromhead, Olson, and Turner and Thomas. What all of these theorists of language have in
common is what we could call a “scenic” view of language—all of them insist on framing
any utterance as taking place on some scene: for Wierzbicka and Bromhead (2009), any
utterance can be dissolved into a scene upon which someone thinks, sees, or says, or hears
something and something that someone might have done, and so on; for Olson (2016),
there is a scene of speech recapitulated within a scene of writing that supplements the
specifically oral elements of the scene of speech; for Thomas and Turner (2011), classic
prose imagines and constructs a scene upon which reader and writer face some object or
event. Even for Bartholomae (2004), there is always a scene of pedagogy, and this is the
disciplinary framing I want to insist on for composition studies and for pedagogies of
critical thinking more generally. We can speak of a scene of pedagogy as a scene of inquiry
and a scene of apprenticeship, and what counts as a pedagogical scene is that some on the
scene guide others to see the same thing as them, a “same thing” that is a construct of the
scene itself. One reason for privileging a study of “stance” as I am doing is that “stance”
likewise presupposes that it is the scene and everyone’s position on it that confers meaning
on any utterance. Academic discourse might be seen as operating on a continuum between
scenes directly constructed and engaged in the scene of writing and all those scenes
presupposed, embedded in the terms of the discourse, referenced directly or indirectly in
the text, with at least potentially recoverable traces left of all these scenes in the discourse.
Hence the centrality of “compression,” which we might have an opportunity to bring onto a
scaled-up pedagogical scene through a classroom use of machine learning searches into
corpora. Signs of scenes near and far, actual and hypothetical, can be made present, while
highlighting the presence of all on the pedagogical scene.
Take a look at the opening of Bartholomae’s (2004) “The Argument of Reading,” the
essay I used in my first-semester composition course in the fall 2024 semester:

It is almost impossible to find a recent account of English (or English as a
school subject) that does not begin with a reference to the problem of the
new criticism and its legacy in the American classroom. The new criticism is
everywhere, we are told; its hold on practice seems firm in spite of the ways
its key texts and key figures have been routed by recent developments in
theory and critical practice. (p. 244)

There are a couple of hedges from Aull and Lancaster’s (2014) list here, but almost all of the
hedging, glossing, conceding and countering was done below the threshold of their list.
These omissions are no reflection on Aull and Lancaster’s research, which serves an
important purpose well. It is, rather, to widen the scene upon which that research is set, to
point to the possibility of articulating the large-scale with the minute, uniting close and
distant reading. Bartholomae here was setting up a conversation with the New Criticism,
with others about the New Criticism, with present claims and complaints about the New

14

Double Helix, Vol 12 (2024)

Criticism, about the New Criticism’s history and the history of its reception, about its
shaping of English, about the distinction between “English” and “English as a school
subject,” about the discrepancy between the fate of its theoretical claims and its
institutionalization, and so on. I am arguing for a pedagogical scene upon which such a
reading scene might be made present, and the opening of a new research space on the
pedagogical scene.

References
Aull, L. (2015). First-year university writing: A corpus-based study with implications for
pedagogy. Palgrave Macmillan.
Aull, L. (2020). How students write: A linguistic analysis. Modern Language Association of
America.
Aull, L., & Lancaster, Z. (2014). Linguistic markers of stance in early and advanced academic
writing. Written Communication, 31(2), 151–183. https://doi.org/10.1177/07410
88314527055
Bartholomae, D. (2004). Writing on the margins: Essays on composition and teaching.
Palgrave MacMillan.
Bromhead, H. (2009). The reign of truth and faith: Epistemic expressions in 16th and 17th
century English. De Gruyter Mouton.
Lancaster, Z. (2016). Do academics really write this way? A corpus investigation of moves
and templates in They say/I say. College Composition and Communication, 67(3),
437–464. https://doi.org/10.58680/ccc201628067
Olson, D. R. (2016). The mind on paper: Reading, consciousness and rationality. Cambridge
University Press.
Smith, S. (2016). Error as strategic style: Finessing the grammar checker [Doctoral
dissertation, Georgia State University]. https://doi.org/10.57709/8849978
Thomas, F-N., & Turner, M. (2011). Clear and simple as the truth: Writing classic prose (2nd
ed.). Princeton University Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (2006). English: Meaning and culture. Oxford University Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (2010). Experience, evidence and sense: The hidden cultural legacy of English.
Oxford University Press.

15